The Man Trap
Shall we pick some flowers, Doctor? When a man visits an old girlfriend she usually expects something like that.
Is that how you get girls to like you, by bribing them? There doesn't seem to be anybody around, does there.
They'll be along. You rushed us down ten minutes early. (enter building)
Professor Crater? Professor? Mrs. Crater? Nervous, Dr. McCoy?
Yeah, a little bit, I guess. You see, we walked out of each other's lives ten years ago. She married Crater, and for all I know she may have forgotten me completely. Of all the bonehead ideas, Jim, how'd I let myself in for things like this?
(singing outside, then enters) Leonard!
Nancy.
Hello.
It's good to see you.
Let me look at you.
You haven't aged a day. Oh, this is Captain Jim Kirk of the Enterprise.
(seeing an older woman than McCoy does) Mrs. Crater. I've heard a great deal about you.
All good, I hope.
And Crewman Darnell.
(seeing a young blonde) How do you do, ma'am?
Something wrong, Darnell?
Excuse me sir but, ma'am, if I didn't know better I would swear you were someone I left behind on Wrigley's Pleasure Planet. It's funny, you're exactly like a girl that
A little less mouth, Darnell.
I'm sorry. I didn't mean to. I mean, I know it's impossible, of course.
Why don't you step outside, Darnell.
Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.
Maybe I'll step outside, too.
What? And let Plum examine me all alone?
Plum?
Plum.
A nickname I gave Leonard when we were very young.
I'll, er, I'll wait for the professor and I'll catch you both at once.
I'd better go get Bob. Every time he starts digging he forgets time, sleep, food, everything. Be back in a minute.
Professor Crater, I'm Captain Kirk. This is
The heroic Captain and the intrepid doctor cross interstellar space to preserve our health. Your sense of duty is overwhelming. Now will you please go back where you came from and tell whoever issues your orders to leave me and my wife alone. We need salt against the heat. Aside from that, we're doing very well, thank you.
I'm pleased you're doing well but I'm required to confirm that fact.
Doubtless the good surgeon will enjoy prodding and poking us with his arcane machinery. Go away, we don't want you.
What you want is unimportant right now. What you will get is required by the book.
Quote. All research personnel on alien planets are required to have their health certified by a starship surgeon at one year intervals. Like it or not, Professor, as commander of the starship, I'm required
To show your gold braid to everyone. You love it, don't you.
He's all yours, Plum. Doctor McCoy.
Sit down and breathe deeply, please.
Did I hear you call him Doctor McCoy?
You did.
McCoy. I've heard Nancy speak of a Doctor McCoy.
That's me. Didn't she mention I was here?
You've seen Nancy?
She went out to get you.
You've seen her too? You were with the good Doctor?
Yes. Why?
Nothing. It's just that it gives me pleasure to know that she's gotten to see an old friend and has a chance for some company. It's different for me, I enjoy solitude. But for a woman. You understand, of course.
Well, it certainly hasn't aged her. She looks exactly as I knew her twelve years ago. Amazing, Jim. Like a girl of twenty five.
Sorry. I'm sorry, Captain, sit down. I seem to have forgotten my manners.
Quite all right.
I'm not joking, Jim. She hasn't aged a day. She doesn't have a grey hair on her head.
She's got some grey, Bones. Excuse me, Professor, she's a handsome woman, yes, but hardly twenty five.
You've seen my wife with the eyes of your past attachment, Doctor. I'm sure when Nancy lets, when you see her again she'll be a believable age.
Well at any rate she doesn't look a day over thirty.
Genuine affection. I'm glad you still feel it for her. Leonard, isn't it? She's a fine woman.
Open your mouth.
Why, I thought the machine
The machine is capable of almost anything but I'll still put my trust in a healthy set of tonsils. Now, open your mouth. (a woman screams, they dash out, Kirk with his phaser drawn)
(removing a piece of plant from Darnell's mouth) McCoy.
Dead, Jim. Strange. A red mottling all over his face.
What happened?
What do you suppose happened, Captain? You beam down a crewman who doesn't know better than to eat an untested plant.
I've just lost a crewman, Mrs. Crater. I want to know what happened.
Well, I, I
Take it easy, Nancy. Just tell us what you know.
I was just. I couldn't find Bob, and I was coming back. I crossed to your crewman. I wanted him to know I wasn't offended by the things he'd said back there. You remember. Then I, I noticed he had a Borgia plant in his hand. Before I could say anything, he, he'd taken a bite from it. He fell, his face all twisted, and. Leonard, you're looking at me like you don't believe me.
No, no, no, no, it's not that. It's something entirely different. Jim, I suppose we could complete these examinations later.
We don't need an examination, you can see that. Perhaps you'd better take your man and
We're well aware of our next duties, Professor. We'll complete your examinations tomorrow. Transporter room.
Transporter room, Captain.
Lock onto us. Three beaming up.
Locked onto you, Captain.
Salt. You did ask them about more salt tablets?
I'll take care of the provisioning, Nancy.
Miss Uhura, your last sub-space log contained an error in the frequencies column.
Mister Spock, sometimes I think if I hear that word frequency once more, I'll cry.
Cry?
I was just trying to start a conversation.
Well, since it is illogical for a communications officer to resent the word frequency, I have no answer.
No, you have an answer. I'm an illogical woman who's beginning to feel too much a part of that communications console. Why don't you tell me I'm an attractive young lady, or ask me if I've ever been in love? Tell me how your planet Vulcan looks on a lazy evening when the moon is full.
Vulcan has no moon, Miss Uhura.
I'm not surprised, Mister Spock.
Transporter room to Bridge. Landing party returning. They report one death.
Bridge acknowledging.
I don't believe it.
Explain.
You explain. That means that somebody is dead and you just sit there. It could be Captain Kirk. He's the closest thing you have to a friend.
Lieutenant, my demonstration of concern will not change what happened. The transporter room is very well-manned and they will call if they need my assistance.
She called it a Borgia plant.
Something new to me.
Bridge to Dispensary.
Go ahead, Mister Spock.
Borgia plant listed in library record tapes as carbon group three vegetation similar to Earth nightshade family. Alkaloid poison. Chemical structure common to class M planets. About the strange mottling on his facial skin surface. There is no reference to this symptom.
Hmm. Well then, this man wasn't poisoned.
Stand by, Mister Spock. She said she saw him eat the plant.
She's mistaken. I know alkaloid poison, what to look for. There's not a trace of it in his body.
There were bits of the plant in his mouth.
Jim, don't tell me my business. He could not have swallowed any. My instruments would have picked up any trace of it whatsoever.
Then what kills a healthy man
I'll tell you something else. This man shouldn't be dead. I can't find anything wrong with him. According to all the tests he should just get up and walk away from here. I don't know. I'll have the tests double-checked. My eyes may be tricking me. I swear, Jim, when I first saw her she looked just as I'd known her ten years ago. Granted, for a moment I may have been looking at her through a romantic haze.
How your lost love affects your vision, Doctor, doesn't interest me. I've lost a man. I want to know what killed him.
Yes, sir.
Message, Captain. Starship base on Caran 4 requesting explanation of our delay here, sir. Space Commander Dominguez says we have supplies he urgently needs.
Got it, Captain.
Well?
No mistake in our record tapes. Borgia plant. Its sole deadly property is alkaloid poison.
And Professor Crater and wife?
Check out perfectly. They arrived here nearly five years ago. Visited by various vessels, made fairly heavy shipments out, of artefacts and reports. However, there has been a marked drop in shipments during the last year.
Dispensary to Captain.
Kirk here.
We found something.
What is it?
I'd rather not put it on the speaker.
Fascinating.
So improbable we almost didn't check it.
What?
Sodium chloride. Not a trace of it.
This man has no salt in his body at all.
Can you explain that, Doctor?
I can't, except that what we normally carry in our bodies is gone from his.
He would die almost instantly.
How? There isn't a mark on his body.
Except the red rings on his face.
You called that skin mottling.
I thought it was, sir. Another error on my part.
I'm not counting them, Bones. Are you in the mood for an apology?
Oh, forget it. I probably was mooning over her. I should have been thinking about my job.
Perhaps you were. Both Nancy and Crater went out of their way to mention one item they needed.
Salt tablets.
Mister Spock, outfit a landing party. We're beaming down with some questions.
One might think that you had more important duties than harassing people, Captain.
I have, Professor. Believe me, I have. Where is Mrs. Crater? I want to talk to her, too.
Captain, you can't just beam down here and bully us, and interfere with our work.
Mrs. Crater. I won't ask again.
Possibly at the other diggings. We don't keep military logs
Green, find her.
Yes, sir. (leaves)
Mister Spock.
Standing by.
Sturgeon, transport a sample of the plant to Mister Spock. We'll check if it's actually the Borgia plant or something we don't understand. (Sturgeon leaves) You got that, Mister Spock?
Complete analysis.
Captain, considering the inescapable fact that you are a trespasser on my planet
Your complaint is noted, sir. Look, something we don't understand killed one of my men. It could prove to be a danger to you and Mrs. Crater, too.
We've been here for almost five years. If there were anything hostile here we would know about it, wouldn't we?
Bones, tell the professor what the autopsy revealed.
Our crewman died of salt depletion. Sudden, total loss of it. Medically impossible by any standards.
And by coincidence, both you and Mrs. Crater requested salt tablets.
And your esteemed physician cannot explain our need for salt tablets?
We're all aware of the need for salt on a hot and arid planet like this, Professor, but it's a mystery, and I don't like mysteries. They give me a bellyache and I've got a beauty right now.
(opening storage box) Nancy and I started with twenty five pounds. This is what we have left. (a few tablets at the bottom of a jar) Now what is so mysterious about that?
(checking tablets) Salt.
One of the missions of the Enterprise is to protect human life in places like this. I'm going to have to ask you and Mrs. Crater to stay aboard my ship until we find out what killed that crewman.
But you can't do that.
But I can, Professor.
Spock here.
Arrange quarters for Professor and Mrs. Crater. Did you get the plant analysis?
It is the Borgia variety, Captain. Could not have caused Darnell's death.
Jim, he's run off.
Nancy! You! Salt! I've got salt! Smell it! Smell it, Nancy!
Professor Crater! Professor Crater!
Professor Crater!
Professor Crater! Professor! Professor!
Jim! Jim, it's Sturgeon. He's dead.
We'd better locate Crewman Green. Green! Green! Crewman Green, report! Green!
Crewman Green, report! Green! Green, where are you? Could it be Crater? He came this way.
I don't know. Green! (Green arrives) Did you see this?
Yes, sir. Sturgeon was dead when I found him. I was circling to find whatever it was.
Same red rings on his face. Have you seen Nancy, Mrs. Crater?
No, sir. I checked all through the ruins.
I'm worried about her, Jim. She's not at the quarters, she's not at the diggings. She could be in trouble. Nancy!
Crater!
Nancy, it's Leonard!
We're beaming aboard the ship, Doctor.
You can't leave her!
We can't search this whole planet on foot.
Jim!
You could learn something from Mister Spock, Doctor. Stop thinking with your glands. We've equipment aboard the Enterprise that could pinpoint a match lit anywhere on this planet, or the heat of a body. Transporter room, Kirk speaking. Three to beam up.
Kirk to Bridge.
Spock here.
Break out the surface search equipment. I want co-ordinates on two people.
Acknowledged.
There's a body down there. Sturgeon.
You could use some sleep, Bones.
All right, Jim.
Bridge.
Oh, Green, what went on down there? (he reaches for the salt cellar) Who do you think you are?
Something odd, Captain. You said two people.
Professor and Nancy Crater.
We get a reading on only one person, probably Crater. He's circling as if searching for something.
Expand search radius.
Yes, sir.
Why don't you go chase an asteroid?
Don't you wish it was?
Where are you, Sulu?
In here feeding the weepers, Janice.
I've got your tray.
May the Great Bird of the Galaxy bless your planet.
Thank you. Hello, Beauregard. How are you today, darling?
Her name's Gertrude.
No, it's a he plant. A girl can tell.
Why do people have to call inanimate objects she, like she's a fast ship.
He is not an inanimate object. He's so animate he makes me nervous. In fact, I keep expecting one of these plants of yours to grab me.
Hello, Green.
He's not talking today. You been nipping saurian brandy or something?
(stroking plant) Take it easy. Calm down. Very sensitive.
He's the real spook. Suppose he's going space happy or something?
In a way, ma'am. You were just thinking of someone like me. I'm guessing of course, but you do look a little lonely.
I see. So naturally, when I'm lonely I think of you.
Ina cuvanea mwanamke turee.
Una kafeeri Hur. You're Swahili?
Lieutenant Uhura to the Bridge. (the crewman begins to reach for her face) Lieutenant Uhura to the Bridge.
I'd better get this tray back. Bye, Beauregard.
Wait a minute, I'll walk along.
Lieutenant Uhura, report to the Bridge.
Lieutenant Uhura. On my way, sir.
McCoy to Bridge. Captain there?
Kirk here. Nothing to report, Doctor. We haven't located Mrs. Crater. What's the matter, can't you sleep?
Nope.
Try taking one of those red pills you gave me last week. You'll sleep.
The simple fact is unless there's something seriously wrong with the ship's equipment, there's only one person within a one hundred mile circle.
All right. We'll triangulate on him. We'll let Professor Crater explain what happened to his wife. (to Uhura) Remember my instructions, Lieutenant. Keep a tight fix on us. If we let out a yell I want an armed party down there before the echo dies.
Yes, Captain.
Nancy. Well, come in. come in. I've been worried sick about you. I wonder why Jim didn't tell me he found you.
I'm so happy to see you, Leonard. The others, they, I, I don't relate to them as much as you. You have such strong memories of me.
Well.
You do care, don't you, Leonard? It makes me feel so, so safe.
Nancy, er
My husband? I like your feelings better. Much stronger. But you're tired, You need to rest.
You're as bad as Jim Kirk. He's been telling me to take these.
I think you should. I'll get you some water.
Look at his face!
Bridge. Sulu. Trouble on deck nine, section two. We need a medical team.
(lying on bed) I was so worried. Your husband acting strange, crewmen dying.
You're so tired, darling. Just rest now.
Medical department alert. Doctors and medics acknowledge.
It's nothing, dear. It's nothing. You just sleep. Nancy will take care of everything.
Dr. McCoy to the Bridge. Dr. McCoy to the Bridge. (Nancy changes to McCoy) Dr. McCoy to the Bridge.
Professor Crater.
Go away! We don't want you here.
We? Where's your wife, Professor? We're concerned about her.
I'm armed. Go away.
Where's your wife, Professor?
She's no concern of yours.
We're worried about her safety. Aren't you? Professor, you're a reasonable man, let me (comm. beep) Kirk here.
Casualty, Captain. Barnhart was found dead on deck nine. Same symptoms.
Spock cutting in, Captain. Something here, through the arches to your left.
Stand by, Mister Sulu. Spock has something.
Green.
He beamed up to the ship with us.
Or something did.
Enterprise from Kirk.
Bridge. Sulu.
You have an intruder aboard. Could be masquerading as Crewman Green. General quarters, security condition three.
GQ security three, sir.
General quarters three. Intruder alert. GQ three. Intruder alert. General quarters three. Intruder alert. GQ three. Intruder alert.
Reporting GQ three secure, Captain. Do you require assistance there?
Crater knows the creature. If we could take him alive.
Negative, Lieutenant, but keep locked in on us. Kirk out. Let's get him. (phaser fire)
We don't want you here! We're happy alone! I'll kill to stay alone. You hear that, Kirk? Or you'll have to kill me. II don't care either way.
Obviously, taking him alive is going to be difficult.
Set your phaser on one quarter. I'll leave mine on stun.
Why risk your life for his?
He's not trying to kill us, he's trying to frighten us, and he's doing a pretty good job.
GQ three now secured except for decks five, seven, and ten. Come in, please.
He's not in supply and maintenance.
Go to Engineering now. Run through file photos of the crewmen there.
Check.
Deck five reporting. Crewman Green is not in his quarters. No one has seen him
Keep in mind if you find him, he's not Crewman Green. The Captain reports Crewman Green is dead.
And he, or rather it, followed me. I thought there was something twitchy about him.
He, whatever, was probably your crewman, too, Lieutenant.
He must have been it. You know, I would have remembered a crewman like him.
The creature leading you a merry chase, Mister Sulu?
The creature?
Or whatever it is that's killing the crewmen. Perhaps I can help. Fill me in.
Set.
Acknowledged. Crater! (Kirk fires his phaser)
Your wife, Professor. Where is she? Your wife, Professor. Where is she?
She was the last of her kind.
The last of her kind?
The last of its kind. Earth history, remember? Like the passenger pigeon or buffalo. Ooh! I feel strange.
Just stunned. You'll be able to think in a minute.
The Earth buffalo. What about it?
Once there were millions of them prairies black with them. One herd covered three whole states, and when they moved they were like thunder.
And now they're gone. Is that what you mean?
Like the creatures here. Once there were millions of them. Now there's one left. Nancy understood.
Always in the past tense.
Where's your wife? Where is she now?
Dead. Buried up on the hill. It killed her.
When?
Oh, a year, or was it two?
Kirk to Enterprise.
Bridge to Captain. Sulu here.
It's definite, Mister Sulu. The intruder can assume any shape. Crewmen, you, myself, anyone. Do you understand?
Affirmative, Captain.
Go to GQ four.
General quarters four, Captain.
The creature was trying to survive. It has that right, doesn't it?
Kirk to transporter room. Three to beam up.
They needed salt to stay alive. There was no more salt. It's the last one. The buffalo. There is no difference.
There's one, Professor. Your creature is killing my people.
Deck five, section three. Deck five, section three. Report.
Security 3 A here. 3 B in sight.
Negative, Captain. I've checked every face on this vessel. It was not a crewman I saw.
Yeoman Rand, how long was this Green with you?
As long as he, it thought it could get to the salt on my tray, sir.
Mister Spock?
Supplies of salt have been set out as bait at all decks and engineering levels, Captain. However, no one or nothing has approached them as yet.
Dr. McCoy?
Yes?
Medical department report, Doctor.
Oh. Well, we could offer it salt without tricks. There's no reason for it to attack us.
Your attitude is laudable, Doctor, but your reasoning is reckless.
(eyeing McCoy carefully) The creature is not dangerous when fed.
No, it's simply trying to survive by using its natural ability to take other forms.
The way the chameleon uses its protective colouring, an ability retained no doubt from its primitive state, the way we have retained our incisor teeth. They were once fangs. Certain of our muscles were designed for chase. It uses its ability the way we would use our muscles and teeth if necessary, to stay alive.
And like us, it's an intelligent animal. There's no need to hunt it down.
A very interesting hypothesis, Doctor. Briefing room.
Thank you, Lieutenant. Continue the search. Crater, we don't know who or what we're looking for. We need your help, and now.
I demanded, I even begged that you get off my planet.
Can you recognise this thing When you see it? Professor, I'll forego charges up to this point but this creature's aboard my ship and I'll have it, or I'll have your skin, or both. Now where is it?
I loved Nancy very much. Few women like my Nancy. She lives in my dreams. She walks and sings in them.
And it becomes Nancy for you.
Not because of tricks. It doesn't trick me. It needs love as much as it needs salt. When it killed Nancy, I almost destroyed it but, it isn't just a beast. It is intelligent and the last of its kind.
You bleed too much, Crater. You're too pure and noble. Are you saving the last of its kind or has this become Crater's private heaven, here on this planet? This thing becomes wife, lover, best friend, wise man, fool, idol, slave. It isn't a bad life to have everyone in the universe at your beck and call, and you win all the arguments.
You don't understand.
Have you learned to see this thing in whatever form it becomes?
Yes.
Are you going to help us find it?
Sorry, I can't.
Recommend we use truth serum, Captain.
Doctor?
Well, I resist using it, but in this case the professor will give us the truth.
Take him.
I'll accompany you, Doctor.
Oh, yes. Of course.
Captain Kirk to dispensary. Captain Kirk to dispensary.
(on biobed) It wasn't McCoy. It was the creature. It hit me. Crater grabbed my phaser. I wondered about McCoy. Doubt had crossed my mind.
Captain. Professor Crater.
Dead. But it had you, too.
Fortunately, my ancestors spawned in another ocean than yours did. My blood cells are quite different.
Leonard. Leonard, wake up. Please help me. Help me, Leonard. They're trying to kill me. Don't let them kill me!
Easy, easy. Nobodies going to
But you must help me!
Move aside, Bones.
What's going on here, Jim?
She's not Nancy, Bones.
Are you insane?
It killed four crewmen. Now Crater.
It?
The creature. It kills. It needs salt to live. Bones, move aside.
No!
My guess is she needs more. You want it, Nancy? Come and get it.
You're frightening her, Jim.
Not fright. Hunger. Look at her.
Leonard, if you love me, make him go away.
Come on. You want this, Nancy? Come on Nancy. Come and get it. Come and get it. Here it is.
Leonard, help me.
Stop it, Jim!
McCoy, get out of the way!
Are you out of your mind?
Get out of the way.
It's killing the Captain. Shoot it, Doctor, quickly!
No! No!
It's killing the captain! Shoot, quick!
I won't shoot Nancy.
This is not Nancy. (hitting her repeatedly) If she were Nancy, could she take this?
Stop it! Stop it, Spock! Stop it! (Nancy sends Spock flying with one slap)
Is that Nancy, Doctor?
No. (she goes to Kirk again) No!
Leonard. Leonard, no. Leonard, please.
Lord, forgive me.
I'm sorry, Bones. 
Ready to leave orbit, Captain.
Something wrong, Captain?
I was thinking about the buffalo, Mister Spock. Warp one, Mister Sulu.
Warp one, sir. Leaving orbit.
Charlie X
All right, Chief, begin materialisation. Captain Ramart, I'm Captain Kirk.
This is my navigator Tom Nellis.
How do you do?
How do you do?
And this is our young castaway Charlie, Charlie Evans. His dossier.
Mister Evans. We've heard a great deal about you. Welcome aboard.
Wonderful boy, Charlie. Its been an honour having him aboard.
Why, it's been a great pleasure. The things that he's learned in the last
Absolutely. To think this boy spent practically his whole life alone on that planet. Everyone killed, just a few microtapes to learn from.
How many humans like me on this ship?
Like a whole city in space, Charlie. Over four hundred in the crew of a starship, aren't there, Captain?
Four hundred and twenty eight, to be exact. Is there anything we can do for you, Captain? Medical supplies, provisions?
Hundreds. All human, like me. That's exciting. Is that the right word?
That's perfect. It's the exact word.
You see. We'd like to keep Charlie with us, but with his closest living relatives on Colony Five and your vessel going that way, why
I'd like to see your ship now. All of it. The people and everything.
You keep interrupting, Mister Evans. That's considered wrong.
I'm sorry.
We have a large supply of entertainment tapes, gentlemen.
No, we've a tight schedule to make, Captain. Just twenty of us, we're making out fine.
This must be a space first. A transport ship that doesn't need anything?
Nothing.
Not even Sarian brandy?
We're fine, thank you. Pleasant journey, Captain.
Thank you. (the pair are beamed off)
Yeoman Rand, this is Charles Evans. Show him to his quarters and drop his records off at Doctor McCoy's office, if you will.
Yes, sir. Come with me, please.
Are you a girl? Is that a girl?
That's a girl.
Tell me. The ship's supply of food concentrates couldn't have lasted fourteen years.
After that I found other things to eat, just growing around.
And you learned to talk by just listening to the ship's tapes?
The memory banks still worked. They talked to me, and I talked back.
You're four-oh.
Four?
Four-oh. One hundred percent. Sound of wind and limb.
That, that Captain. Kirk?
Yeah.
Why does he call me Mister Evans?
Because that's your name.
He's not, well, he isn't like Captain Ramart.
Well, no. Captain Kirk is one of a kind, Charlie.
Do you like me?
Why not?
Some, the other ship, they didn't like me. I tried. I'm trying to make people like me. I want them to like me.
Most seventeen year olds do. Come on, let's go. I'll show you to your quarters.
I brought you a present.
Oh, thank you. I really appreciate it, but, but I have to go. I'm on duty.
Do you like that kind?
Yes, I, it's my favourite. Where did you get it? They don't have any in the ship's stores.
It's a present.
I know, but where did? Gee, I'm late, Charlie. I really have to go.
Can't you stay and talk a little while?
Look, I'm off duty at fourteen hundred. Why don't you join me in recreation room six, deck three.
You got a deal, friend. (slaps her bottom)
Charlie!
I thought. Don't be angry. I didn't, I wanted.
Charlie, you, you, you just don't go around slapping girls on the. It's okay, but er, just don't do it again.
Don't be angry.
Look, why don't you tell Captain Kirk or Doctor McCoy what you did. They'll explain it to you. Okay?
I will.
Okay.
But tell me, what reason would he have to lie if there are Thasians?
That is a very intriguing question. Scanners show no disturbances in this quadrant, Captain.
Good. Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock is working out
Excuse me, Captain. Status report.
Thank you. He's working out a training programme for Charlie Evans. Earth history, his own background, that sort of thing. I'd like you to give him the necessary medical orientation on the problems of, um, er, adolescence.
Well, don't you think it'd be better for a strong father image like you? He already looks up to you.
The job is yours, Bones. Flattery will get you nowhere.
Doctor, didn't the boy make any reference at all to Thasians?
Do you believe the legend, Mister Spock, that Thasians still exist on that planet in some form?
Charlie's very existence proves in fact there must be some intelligent form of life on Thasus. He could not possibly have survived alone. The ship's food concentrates would have been exhausted in a year or so.
By which time he would have been eating fruits, vegetables.
Probes of Thasus indicate very little edible plant life.
And probes have been known to be wrong, Spock.
Doctor, are you speaking scientifically or emotionally?
Gentlemen, the fact is the boy is here and he's alive and he needs our help.
And he needs a guide and he needs a father image, Jim.
Hmm. I'll depend on your astute abilities to supply him with that, or find him one.
I'm sorry. I did it again, didn't I. 
(singing) Oh, on the starship Enterprise There's someone who's in Satan's guise Whose devil ears and devil eyes Could rip your heart from you. At first, his look could hypnotise And then his touch would barbarise His alien love could victimise And rip your heart from you. And that's why female astronauts, Oh, very female astronauts Wait terrified and overwrought To find what he will do. Oh, girls in space, be wary, be wary, be wary, Girls in space, be wary. We know not what he'll do.
One more time!
(singing) Now from a planet out in space, there comes a lad, not commonplace. A-seeking out his first embrace. He's saving it for you. Oh, Charlie's our new darling, our darling, our darling. Charlie's our new darling. We know not what he'll do. 
Want to see something? (puts three cards face down) Turn them over. (They have pictures of Rand on them)
Well, how did you do that?
Oh, I can do a lot of card tricks. One of the men on the Antares showed me. 
I don't believe this! 
On Earth today, it's Thanksgiving. If the crew has to eat synthetic meat loaf, I want it to look like turkey. Charlie.
Captain? I'm supposed to ask you something. Why shouldn't I? I don't know how to explain it.
Say it right out, Charlie. That usually works.
Well, in the corridor I saw. When Janice, when Yeoman Rand was. (slaps Kirk's bottom) I did that to her. She didn't like it. She said you'd explain it to me.
Me. I see. Well, um, er, there are things you can do with a lady, er, Charlie, that you er. There's no right way to hit a woman. I mean, man to man is one thing, but, er, man and woman, er, it's, er, it's, er. Well it's, er, another thing. Do you understand?
I don't know.
Captain Kirk.
Excuse me. Kirk here.
Captain Ramart of the Antares is on D channel.
I'm on my way to the Bridge now.
Can I come with you?
I don't think so, Charlie.
I won't get in the way.
Okay.
Can you boost your power, Antares. We're barely reading your transmission.
We're at full output, Enterprise. I must speak to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here, Captain Ramart.
Captain, we're just barely in range. I've got to warn
Re-establish contact.
They're not transmitting.
Keep trying.
It wasn't very well constructed.
Sweep the area of the Antares transmission with our probe scanners, Mister Spock.
Affirmative, Captain.
You think something happened to the Antares, Charlie?
I don't know.
Picking up some debris on our scanners, Captain.
What about the Antares?
The debris is what's left of the Antares.
Kirk here.
Chief, have you been 
Your mind is not on the game, Captain. Check. The Antares?
A survey ship with twenty men aboard lost. No reason. Obviously, Captain Ramart was not aware of any trouble. I can't figure it.
My own concern is more immediate. The boy.
I can usually follow you, Mister Spock, but this time?
He seemed to know what happened to the Antares before we did.
I'd call it a pretty long reach for evidence, Mister Spock. Come in, Charlie.
And again, check.
Checkmate.
Your illogical approach to chess does have its advantages on occasion, Captain.
I prefer to call it inspired.
As you wish. At any rate, the game is yours.
You play chess, Charlie?
Oh, I, I watched them play on the Antares. Can I try?
I place you in the hands of our chess master. 
The principles of three-dimensional chess are basically mathematic, Charlie. You put the white here and the black on the secondary level.
I know what it is. Let's play.
Very well. (just three moves later) That was a mistake, Charlie.
No, it wasn't.
Checkmate.
No, it isn't.
If you'll excuse me. 
Oh, Charlie. I was looking for you. I'd like you to meet Tina Lawton, Yeoman Third Class. Charlie Evans.
Hello, Charlie.
I thought you might enjoy meeting someone your own age.
Can I talk to you, alone.
Charlie, Tina's
Excuse me. I must be wanted somewhere.
That was, that was rude and completely uncalled-for.
But I don't need her. I want to talk to you.
That's no excuse. You'd better learn that right now. You have to live with people, Charlie. You're not alone anymore.
But she's not as. She doesn't. She's not the same. Not like you. She's, she's just a girl. You're, you smell like a girl. All the other girls on the ship they, they look just like Tina. You're the only one who looks like you. You can understand, can't you? You know about being with somebody? Wanting to be? If I had the whole universe I'd give it to you. When I see you, I feel like I'm hungry all over. Hungry. Do you know how that feels?
What?
I wasn't sure I should, er, talk to you about this.
Charlie's a seventeen year old boy.
Exactly, and he's
I talked to him about the swat.
It's not that. Captain, I've seen the look before, and if something isn't done, sooner or later I'm going to have to hurt him. Tell him to leave me alone, and that wouldn't be good for him right now. You see, I'm his first crush, his first love, and his first
Yes, Yeoman, I'll talk to him. I'll look into it.
Thank you, sir.
Come in, Charlie. Er, Charlie. Charlie, do you know anything about this chess piece? Did you notice anything peculiar in them when we were using them this afternoon?
No, sir. Is that all?
Er, no. No, no. Sit down. Charlie, being seventeen is more than how many years you've lived. It's a whole other thing. Doctor McCoy could probably explain the biological conditions. Well, let's, let's use a specific. Yeoman Rand is a woman.
Oh, I won't hit her like that anymore.
No, there's more to it than that.
Everything I do or say is wrong. I'm in the way, I don't know the rules, and when I learn something and try to do it, suddenly I'm wrong!
Now wait, wait.
I don't know what I am or what I'm supposed to be, or even who. I don't know why I hurt so much inside all the time.
You'll live, believe me. There's nothing wrong with you that hasn't gone wrong with every other human male since the model first came up.
What if you care for someone? What do you do?
You go slow. You be gentle. I mean, it's not a one-way street, you know, how you feel and that's all. It's how the girl feels, too. Don't press, Charlie. If the girl feels anything for you at all, you'll know it. Do you understand?
You don't think Janice. You. She could love me!
She's not the girl, Charlie. The years are wrong, for one thing, and there are other things.
She can.
No, Charlie.
She is.
No.
But if I did what you said! If I was gentle!
Charlie, there are a million things in this universe you can have and there are a million things you can't have. It's no fun facing that, but that's the way things are.
Then what am I going to do?
Hang on tight and survive. Everybody does.
You don't.
Everybody, Charlie. Me, too.
I'm trying, but I don't know how.
Kirk here.
You asked to be notified when we were to make our course adjustments, sir.
Ask Mister Spock to see to it. Charlie, come on with me.
You've got to slap the floor to absorb the energy when you fall. Go ahead, try it. Like everything else, it takes practice, Charlie. Try again. Good. That's much better. Here, now I'll show you a shoulder roll. Try that.
I don't want to do that.
Well, it makes it hard to teach you
I don't want to do that.
All right, Charlie. Lesson's over for today.
You were going to teach me how to fight.
You have to learn to protect yourself in a fall before I do that. It's more than teaching you to defend yourself. Charlie, I want you to learn. Charlie? Hey, Sam, let me borrow you for a couple easy throws, all right?
Right.
Watch this, Charlie. That wasn't so bad, was it? Now I'll throw him. Here we go, Sam.
That looks hard.
Oh.
Come on, Charlie. Try it. Attaboy. Let's go. 
Oh! 
That wasn't so bad, was it?
Don't laugh at me.
Cool off.
Don't laugh at me! 
Charlie.
He shouldn't have done that. It's not nice to laugh at people.
What happened to him, Charlie?
He's gone.
That's no answer.
He's gone! I didn't mean to do that. He made me do it! He laughed at me.
Bridge.
Kirk here. Two men from security, on the double.
Affirmative.
What are you going to do to me?
I'm confining you to quarters. I want you to stay there.
I won't let them hurt me. I'll make them go away, too.
They won't hurt you, Charlie. (security arrive) They'll take you to your quarters, Charlie. Go with them.
No! (phaser disappears)
Go to your quarters.
He was going to hurt me.
Go to your quarters or I'll pick you up and carry you there.
I won't let you.
That's your choice, Charlie.
I won't let them hurt me.
They won't hurt you.
Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Security reports that all phaser weapons have disappeared. Shall I repeat, Captain?
No, I heard you. Have Doctor McCoy and Mister Spock meet me in the Briefing room.
Thasians have been referred to in our records as having the power to transmute objects or render substances invisible. It has generally been regarded as legend, but Charlie does seems to possess this same power.
What are chances that Charlie's not an Earthling, that he's a Thasian?
No, I don't think so, not unless they're exactly like Earthlings. The development of his fingers and toes exactly matches the present development of mans on Earth.
Agreed.
Well, whatever he is, we have some idea of the power he has. I know what I saw him do in the gymnasium.
Considering the effect a normal adolescent has on a home, Charlie with the power he has
Short-tempered, because he doesn't understand. He needs, he wants. Nothing happens fast enough.
The probability is he's responsible for the destruction of the Antares, which would indicate a total disregard for human life.
He doesn't understand what life is. He's a boy.
Well, what do we do with this boy, Jim? How do we keep him caged up?
It goes even further than that, Doctor. We can't take him with us to Earth Colony Five. Can you imagine what he'd do in an open, normal environment. I've talked with him, listened. He's a boy in a man's body, trying to be an adult with the adolescence in him getting in the way.
And with a weapon in him which could destroy you or anyone, anywhere on this ship.
Well, for the moment he's stopped. You're an authority he respects, Jim.
Agreed. The struggle must remain between you and him. Should any of us interfere 
You wanted to ask me something, he said.
Are you responsible for what happened to the Antares, Charlie?
Why?
Answer me.
Yes. There was a warped baffle-plate on the shield of their energy pile. I made it go away. It would've blown up anyway. Well they weren't nice to me! They wanted to get rid of me. They don't now.
What about us, Charlie?
I don't know. 
We're in the hands of an adolescent.
Lieutenant, raise Colony Five. I want to speak directly to the governor.
Yes, sir.
Navigator, lay a course away from Colony Five. Buy me some time.
Spock, get the doctor up here on the double. How bad is it?
I think it's all right, sir. Sir, there's no reason for that panel to cross-circuit like that. I checked it over myself not fifteen minutes ago.
Mister Spock, you getting any readings on your instruments?
Yes, sir. There's a Tyger, tyger, burning bright in the forest of the night.
Mister Spock.
I'm trying to Saturn rings around my head, down a road that's Martian red.
You're trying to change course, Captain. You can't do that. I want to get to Colony Five as soon as we can.
Release the transmitter.
You don't need all that subspace chatter.
What's going on here? Spock calls me to the Bridge and goes into some kind of poetry.
See to her, Doctor.
Once upon a midnight dreary while I pondered, weak and weary.
Very nice, Mister Ears. Oh, I can make him do anything, whirl around, laugh, anything.
That's enough, Charlie.
Don't you think he's funny? I think he's funny.
Leave my crew alone. (Charlie leaves)
Jim, he'll soon reach a point where he won't back down.
I know.
Charlie, what's wrong? (he turns her into an iguana)
I have something for you. (a rose) Pink is your favourite, isn't it?
You don't walk into a room without knocking.
Don't ever lock your door on me again, Janice. I love you.
I'll lock it when I please. What is it you want, anyway?
You. I only want to be nice to you. I can give you anything. Just, just tell me.
(switching on comm.) I want you to get out.
But I only want to be nice to you.
Get out, Charlie.
Spock.
I can't make it any plainer than that.
I love you.
You don't know what the word means.
Then show me.
No! 
Charlie! 
Why did she do that? I loved her, but she wasn't nice at all. What you did wasn't nice either, but I still need you, Captain. The Enterprise isn't quite like the Antares. Running the Antares was easy. You have to be nice. All right? (gives pain)
Mister Spock?
My legs. They're broken.
Let him go, too, Charlie.
Why?
Because I'm telling you to. Because you need me to run the ship, and I need him.
If you try to hurt me again, I'll make a lot of people go away.
And what about Yeoman Janice? Is she dead? Gone? Destroyed?
I won't tell you. Growing up isn't so much. I'm not a man, and I can do anything! You can't.
I'll activate the force field myself. You can return to your section.
He had a mean look. I had to freeze him. I like happy looks. (enters room) Aren't you coming in?
That wasn't nice. You'll be sorry. You wait, you'll see, you'll be sorry you did that. (unfreezes them) You will.
No. No laughing!
Captain Kirk, my instruments show we're receiving a message on subspace frequency three, ship-to-ship. I can't hear it, sir.
Are you creating that message, Charlie, or you're blocking one that's coming in.
It's my game, Captain. You have to find out. Like you said, that's how the game's played. You can have it now. I've locked on course for Colony Five again. (leaves)
I've waited long enough. I'm going to take him on.
You don't have any special immunity. Not anymore. Pushed far enough, he'd send you off to oblivion, too.
Mister Spock?
Out of the question.
Wait a minute. Does Charlie? Now, wait, Spock, has he done away with anybody since he took over?
Not so far as we know.
Maybe he can't. Could be he's overreached himself. It's a big ship. He's taken full control. If we could tax his power, turn on every device on the ship, every circuit, every light, all of it, and while he's fighting that, if I could distract him, maybe you could tranquilize him, keep him under until we reach Colony Five.
Risky, Jim.
If we don't try, Doctor, he'll get rid of us anyway. There's no choice, gentlemen, none at all.
I can make you all go away anytime I want to.
Get out of my chair, Charlie, and get out of it now.
I've got your ship, Captain.
Maybe, Charlie, but I don't think you can handle any more. I think you've reached your limit and can't take on one more thing, but you're going to have to.
I could've sent you away before, but I didn't.
You're going to have to take me on.
Don't make me do it now.
You've got my ship, and I want it back. I want my crew back, whole, if I have to break your neck to do it! (throws him out of command chair)
Don't push me. (gives Kirk pain) Sorry. I'm sorry but. Stop it. I said stop it!
Captain, the navigation console is clear now. The ship is answering the helm.
Sir, something off our starboard bow. The message says they're from Thasus. 
Oh.
Captain, how did I?
It's all right, Yeoman.
Sensors show there something's there, Captain. Deflectors indicate no solid substance.
No! Oh, no, please, don't let them take me. I can't live with them anymore. You're my friends. You said you were my friends, remember? When I came aboard! Please, I want to go home. Take me home.
I have taken my form from centuries ago, so that I may communicate with you. We did not realise until too late that the boy had gone, and we are saddened that his escape cost the lives of the first ship. We could not help them, but we have returned your people and your ship to you. Everything is as it was.
I won't do it again. Please, I'll be good. I won't ever do it again. I'm sorry about the Antares. I'm sorry! When I came aboard! Please, I want to go with you. Help me!
The boy belongs with his own kind.
That would be impossible.
With training, we can teach him to live in our society. If he can be taught not to use his power
We gave him the power so he could live. He will use it, always, and he would destroy you and your kind, or you would be forced to destroy him to save yourselves.
Is there nothing you can do?
We offer him life, and we will take care of him. Come, Charles.
Oh, please, don't let them take me. I can't even touch them! Janice, they can't feel. Not like you! They don't love! Please, I want to stay. (fades away)
Charlie's back on board the Thasian ship, sir. They signal they're leaving.
It's all right, Yeoman. It's all over now.
Where No Man Has Gone Before
Your move, Captain.
We should have intercepted by now. The Bridge said they'd call.
I'll have you checkmated your next move.
Have I ever mentioned you play a very irritating game of chess, Mister Spock?
Irritating? Ah, yes. One of your Earth emotions.
Certain you don't know what irritation is?
The fact one of my ancestors married a human female
Terrible having bad blood like that.
No visual contact, Mister Kelso?
No, sir. It's too small to be a vessel. It only reads about one metre in diameter.
Not large enough even for a lifeboat.
Lock onto it, Mister Kelso.
Materialiser ready, sir.
Bring it aboard. Old-style ship recorder that could be ejected when something threatened the ship.
More like destroyed the ship in this case. Look at it. Burnt, pitted.
Let's hope its tapes are intact. We'll feed it through Mister Spock's computer.
Yes, sir. It's begun transmitting, sir.
Flash the Bridge. Put all decks on the alert.
Hold it, Jim.
Getting into shape?
Yeah, well I figured you weren't on the Bridge. Kelso's voice sounded a little nervous. Well, uh, you finish the game?
He played most illogically. His next move should have been the rook.
Yore relieved, Mister Alden.
Acknowledged, Mister Mitchell.
Screen on.
Screen on, sir. Approaching galaxy edge, sir.
Neutralise warp, Mister Mitchell. Hold this position.
Neutralise warp, sir.
Address intercraft.
Intercraft open.
This is the Captain speaking. The object we encountered is a ship's disaster recorder, apparently ejected from the S.S. Valiant two hundred years ago.
The tapes are burnt out. Trying the memory banks.
We hope to learn from the recorder what the Valiant was doing here and what destroyed the vessel. We'll move out into our probe as soon as we have those answers. All decks, stand by.
Department heads, sir. You wanted everybody on the Bridge before we left the galaxy. Jones.
Astro sciences standing by, Captain.
Engineering division ready, as always.
Life sciences ready, sir. This is Doctor Dehner, who joined the ship at the Aldebaran colony.
Psychiatry, Captain. My assignment is to study crew reaction in emergency conditions.
Getting something from the recorder now.
lf there was an emergency, I'd be interested in how that crew reacted, too.
Improving the breed, Doctor? Is that your line?
I heard that's more your specialty, Commander, line included.
(to Kelso) Walking freezer unit.
Decoding memory banks. I'll try to interpolate. The Valiant had encountered a magnetic space storm and was being swept in this direction.
The old impulse engines weren't strong enough.
Swept past this point, about a half light year out of the galaxy, they were thrown clear, turned, and headed back into the galaxy here. I'm not getting it all. The tapes are pretty badly burned. Sounds like the ship had encountered some unknown force. Now, orders, counter orders, repeated urgent requests for information from the ship's computer records for anything concerning ESP in human beings.
Extrasensory perception. Doctor Dehner, how are you on ESP?
In tests I've taken, my ESP rated rather high.
I'm asking what you know about ESP.
It is a fact that some people can sense future happenings, read the backs of playing cards and so on, but the esper capacity is always quite limited.
Severe damage. Seven crewmen dead. No, make that six. One crewman seemed to have recovered. That's when they became interested in extrasensory perception. More than interested, almost frantic about it. No, this must be garbled. I get something about destruct. I must have read it wrong. It sounded like the captain giving an order to destroy his own ship.
Comments?
The only fact we have for sure is that the S.S. Valiant was destroyed.
That's probably the best argument to continue the probe. Other vessels will be heading out here someday and they'll have to know what they'll be facing. We're leaving the galaxy, Mister Mitchell. Ahead, warp factor one.
Force field of some kind.
We're coming up on it fast.
Sensor beam on.
Sensor beam on, sir.
Deflectors full intensity.
Deflectors full intensity.
Deflectors say there's something there, sensors say there isn't. Density negative. Radiation negative. Energy negative.
Whatever it is, contact in twelve seconds.
Gravitation on automatic. (consoles blow up) Emergency stations. All decks on fire alert. Neutralise controls. Kelso, put it on manual. Any radiation? Anything?
Negative!
Helmsmen, take us out of here. (Dehner gets hit by an electric charge, then Mitchell) Helmsmen! (Kirk takes controls) Lateral power! (Spock takes over, Enterprise veers away) Take damage reports.
Damage control reports, all stations!
Gravity control switching to batteries.
Something hit me, like an electrical charge.
He's alive. Appears to be in shock.
Engineering deck three, can you give damage report?
Main engines are out, sir. We're on emergency power cells. Casualties, nine dead.
Gravity is down to point eight.
Gary. Gary, are you all right?
I'm a little weak for some reason, Jim, but I feel all right now. (opens eyes, they're glowing)
Autopsy report, sir. Each case showed damage to the body's neural circuit. An area of the brain was burned out.
And you, are you feeling all right?
Yes. Mitchell, too, except for his eyes. We're trying to find a reason for that now, and why, out of our whole crew, only certain people were affected.
I think we've found that answer, Doctor.
You mentioned that tests show you have a high degree of extrasensory perception. So do the records of the others. Gary Mitchell has the highest esper rating of all.
lf you're suggesting there's anything dangerous
Before the Valiant was destroyed, its captain was frantically searching for ESP information on his crew.
Espers are simply people with flashes of insight.
Are there not also those who seem to see through solid objects, cause fires to start spontaneously?
There's nothing about it that could possibly make a person dangerous.
Doctor Dehner is speaking of normal ESP power.
Perhaps you know of another kind?
Do we know for sure, Doctor, that there isn't another kind?
(without looking) Hello, Jim. Hey, you look worried.
I've been worried about you ever since that night on Deneb IV.
Yeah, she was nova, that one. Not nearly as many after-effects this time, except for the eyes. They kind of stare back at me when I'm shaving.
Do you feel any different?
Well, in a way, I feel better than I've ever felt before in my life. Actually seems to have done me some good.
How?
Well, I'm getting a chance to read some of that longhair stuff you like. Hey man, I remember you back at the Academy. A stack of books with legs. The first thing I ever heard from an upperclassman was, watch out for Lieutenant Kirk. In his class, you either think or sink.
I wasn't that bad, was I?
If I hadn't aimed that little blonde lab technician at you
You what? You planned that?
Well, you wanted me to think, didn't you? I outlined her whole campaign for her.
I almost married her!
Better be good to me. I'm getting even better ideas here.
(looks at monitor) You? Spinoza?
Once you get into him, he's rather simple though. Childish, almost. I don't agree with him at all.
Go on.
Hey, I'm trying to tell you I feel fine. When do I go back on duty?
I'm going to ask Doctor Dehner to keep you under observation for a while.
With almost a hundred women on board, you can do better than that, friend Captain.
Consider it a challenge.
That doesn't seem very friendly. (weird voice) Didn't I say you'd better be (normal) good to me?
He's reading even faster now than just a few moments ago. Is that Gary Mitchell, the one you used to know?
Put a twenty four hour watch on the Sickbay. Fullest possible range of examinations and tests.
Perfect, perfect. I've never had a patient like you, Gary. Even the healthiest are generally off on some reading. leaves)
I know you don't particularly like me, Mister Mitchell, but since I am assigned here, can we make the best of it?
I've got nothing against you, Doctor.
Nor against the walking freezer unit?
Well, I, sorry about that.
Women professionals do tend to overcompensate. Now let's talk about you. How do you feel?
You know, everybody, everybody seems worried that I don't have some kind of fever or something. Maybe if we could just change these dials (sends them soaring). Now back to normal, I think.
How did you do that?
I'm not sure, I, I just thought of making it happen, and it does. It's, hey, er hey watch this, Doc.
Stop it. Stop it! You were dead for almost twenty two seconds. There were no readings at all.
Yeah. Oh, boy. You, you know, Doc, there have been other things too, like going halfway through the ship's library in hardly a day. Yeah. Oh, what's happening to me?
Do you remember everything you read that quickly?
Yeah.
On any tape?
Sure. Yeah.
Try this one.
Yeah.
Page three eighty seven.
My love has wings. Slender, feathered things with grace in upswept curve and tapered tip. The Nightingale Woman, written by Phineas Tarbolde on the Canopius planet back in 1996. It's funny you picked that one, Doctor.
Why?
That's one of the most passionate love sonnets of the past couple of centuries. How do you feel, Doctor?
What?
How do you feel?
I just fell. Nothing happened.
Er, I was on my coffee break. I thought I'd check up on
Yeah. Sure.
So, er, so, how go the repairs?
Well, the main engines are gone, unless we can find some way to re-energise them.
You'd better check the starboard impulse packs. Those points have about decayed to lead.
Oh, yeah, sure, Mitch.
I'm not joking, Lee! You activate those packs, and you'll blow the whole impulse deck.
I'll, er, I'll get on it right away. I just wanted to stop by and make sure you were okay. See you later. (leaves)
He's a fool. A fool. He'd seen those points and he hadn't noticed their condition.
How do you know?
The image of what he'd seen was still in his mind.
Well, it didn't make any sense that he'd know, but naturally, I checked out the circuit anyway. I don't know how, but he was right. This point is burned out exactly the way he described it.
Sorry I'm late. I became so interested in observing Gary, Mister Mitchell.
Our subject is not Gary Mitchell. Our concern is, rather, what he is mutating into.
I know those from your planet aren't suppose to have feelings like we do, Mister Spock, but to talk that way about a man you've worked next to for years is worse than
That's enough, Doctor.
I don't think so. I understand you least of all. Gary told me that you've been friends since he joined the service, that you asked for him aboard your first command.
It is my duty, whether pleasant or unpleasant, to listen to the reports, observations, even speculations, on any subject that might affect the safety of this vessel, and it's my science officer's duty to see I'm provided with that. Go ahead, Mister Spock.
Have you noted evidence of unusual powers?
He can control certain autonomic reflexes. He reads very fast, retains more than most of us might consider usual.
Mister Scott, would you repeat what you just told us?
About an hour ago, the Bridge controls started going crazy. Levers shifting by themselves, buttons being pushed, instrument readings changing.
And on my monitor screen I could see Mitchell smiling each time it happened, as if this ship and crew were almost a toy for his amusement.
Are they right, Doctor? Has he shown abilities of such magnitude?
I saw some such indications.
And you didn't think it worth mentioning?
No one's been hurt, have they? Don't you understand? A mutated superior man could also be a wonderful thing. The forerunner of a new and better kind of human being.
Mister Sulu.
If you want the mathematics of this, Mitchell's ability is increasing geometrically. That is, like having a penny, doubling it every day. In a month, you'll be a millionaire.
In less time than that, he will have attained powers we can't understand and can't cope with. Soon we'll be not only useless to him, but actually an annoyance.
There'll be no discussion of this with the crew. Thank you. (everyone else leaves)
We'll never reach an Earth base with him aboard, Jim. You heard the mathematics of it. In a month he'll have as much in common with us as we'd have with a ship full of white mice.
I need a recommendation, Spock, not vague warnings.
Recommendation one. There's a planet a few light days away from here. Delta Vega. It has a lithium cracking station. We may be able to adapt some of its power packs to our engines.
And if we can't? We'll be trapped in orbit there. We haven't enough power to blast back out.
It is the only possible way to get Mitchell off this ship.
If you mean strand Mitchell there, I won't do it. That station is fully automated. There's not a soul on the whole planet. Even the ore ships call only once every twenty years.
Then you have one other choice. Kill Mitchell while you still can.
Get out of here.
It is your only other choice, assuming you make it while you still have time.
Will you try for one moment to feel? At least act like you've got a heart. We're talking about Gary.
The captain of the Valiant probably felt the same way, and he waited too long to make his decision. I think we've both guessed that.
Set course for Delta Vega.
I'm thirsty. (cup slides under tap, is filled, then flies through the air to his hand) It's like a man who has been blind all of his life, suddenly being given sight. Sometimes I feel there's nothing I couldn't do, in time. Some people think that makes me a monster, don't they Jim.
Are you reading all our thoughts, Gary?
I can sense mainly worry in you, Jim. Safety of your ship.
What would you do in my place?
Probably just what Mister Spock is thinking now. Kill me while you can.
Stop it, Gary!
I also know we're orbiting Delta Vega, Jim. I can't let you force me down there. I may not want to leave this ship, not yet. I may want another place. I'm not sure yet just what kind of a world I can use.
Use?
I don't understand it all yet, but if I keep growing, getting stronger, why, the things I could do, like, like maybe a god could do. (Kirk knocks him out)
I want him unconscious for a while. (Dehner sedates him)
You fools! Soon I'll squash you like insects. (Piper re-sedates him)
Energise.
Can you do it, Lee?
Maybe, if we can bypass the fuel bins without blowing ourselves up.
Take him.
There's not a soul on this planet but us?
Nobody but us chickens, Doctor.
I think I've got the 203-R set, Lee.
Good, Alden. Transport it up with you, will you?
Okay.
The fuel bins, Lee. Could they be detonated from here?
A destruct switch? I guess I could wire one up right there.
Do it.
He's regaining consciousness.
Doctor Piper. I want only one medical officer here at any one time. The other will monitor him on the dispensary screen.
I'd like to stay now, try to talk to him.
My friend James Kirk. remember those rodent things on Dimorus? The poisoned darts they threw? I took one meant for you.
And almost died. I remember.
So why be afraid of me now?
You've been testing your ability to take over the Enterprise. In the transporter room, you said something about us seeming like insects by comparison, squashing us if we got in your way.
I was drugged then.
Yes. In the Sickbay, you said if you were in my place, you'd kill a mutant like yourself.
Why don't you kill me then? Mister Spock is right and you're a fool if you can't see it.
You don't mean that, Gary.
Man cannot survive if a race of true espers is born. In time you'll understand that. (tests the forcefield)
Gary. Gary, don't!
Jim.
His eyes went back to normal.
Fighting the force field drained his strength, for a while at least. He could be handled now.
I'll just keep getting stronger. You know that, don't you.
(having put new panel in a bridge station) It fits like a glove, Captain.
Oh, did Mister Spock get the phaser rifle we sent down?
I didn't order any (Spock enters with rifle) Affirmative. Landing party out.
He tried to get through the force field again. His eyes changed back faster. He didn't become as weak.
Doctor Dehner feels he isn't that dangerous. What makes you right and a trained psychiatrist wrong?
Because she feels. I don't. All I know is logic. In my opinion we'll be lucky if we can repair this ship and get away in time.
Direct to the power bins. From here you could blow up this whole valley.
If Mitchell gets out, at your discretion, Lee, if sitting here, you think you're the last chance, I want you to hit that button.
He's been like that for hours now.
Have Doctor Piper meet us in the control room with Kelso. We'll all transport up together.
If he should try to stop us
Kelso will be on the destruct button until the last minute. I think he knows that.
I'm staying behind with him.
Fission chamber three checks out. The station seems to be running fine.
You're a talented thief, Kelso. Everything you sent up seems to be fitting in place.
I'm kind of proud of the job we've done. We're going to be ready to transport up (a cable loops over his neck from behind and throttles him)
You're leaving with the ship, Doctor.
He is not evil.
I gave you an order, Doctor.
You should have killed me while you could, James. Command and compassion is a fool's mixture. (zaps Kirk and Spock then waves away the forcefield. He leads Dehner into his cell and we see in the mirror her eyes are like his now)
It hit me, too, whatever it was. Kelso is dead, strangled. At least Spock's alive.
Doctor Dehner?
She went with Mitchell.
Don't give him a pill until after I'm gone. It's my fault Mitchell got as far as he did. Did you see their direction?
Yes, there was some morning light. They were headed across the valley, to the left of the pointed peaks. There's flatlands beyond.
When Mister Spock recovers, you'll both transport up immediately to the Enterprise.
But Captain
If you have not received a signal from me within twelve hours, you'll proceed at maximum warp to the nearest Earth base with my recommendation that this entire planet be subjected to a lethal concentration of neutron radiation. No protest on this, Mark. That's an order.
It would take almost a miracle to survive here.
Then I shall make one. Behold. (creates and oasis with flowers and a spring) You'll soon share this feeling, Elizabeth. To be like God, to have the power to make the world anything you want it to be.
What's wrong?
A visitor. A very foolish man. You'll enjoy being a god, Elizabeth. Blasphemy? No. Let there be food. Kaferian apples. Whenever we visited that planet, I always favoured these. Can you hear me, James? You cannot see me. I'm not there. You follow the right path, James. You'll come to me soon.
I can see him in my mind, too.
Go to him, Elizabeth, talk to him. Now that you're changing I want you to see just how unimportant they are.
Yes, it just took a little longer for it to happen to me.
You must help me Before it goes too far.
What he's doing is right for him and me.
And for humanity? You're still human
No, I
At least partly, you are, or you wouldn't be here talking to me.
Earth is really unimportant. Before long, we'll be where it would have taken mankind millions of years of learning to reach.
What will Mitchell learn in getting there? Will he know what to do with his power? Will he acquire the wisdom?
Please go back while you still can.
Did you hear him joke about compassion? Above all else, a god needs compassion. Mitchell! Elizabeth.
What do you know about gods?
Then let's talk about humans, about our frailties. As powerful as he gets, he'll have all that inside him.
Go back.
You were a psychiatrist once. You know the ugly, savage things we all keep buried, that none of us dare expose. But he'll dare. Who's to stop him? He doesn't need to care. Be a psychiatrist for one minute longer. What do you see happening to him? What's your prognosis, Doctor?
He's coming.
Then watch him. Hang on to being a human for one minute longer.
I'm disappointed in you, Elizabeth. (phaser rifle has no effect on him) I've been contemplating the death of an old friend. He deserves a decent burial, at least. (a grave appears in the rock, with a tombstone engraved James R Kirk. A massive boulder on the cliff above is loosened)
Stop it, Gary.
Morals are for men, not gods.
A god, but still driven by human frailty. Do you like what you see?
Time to pray, Captain. Pray to me.
To you? Not to both of you?
Pray that you die easily.
There'll only be one of you in the end. One jealous god. if all this makes a god, or is it making you something else?
Your last chance, Kirk.
Do you like what you see? Absolute power corrupting absolutely. (Dehner zaps Mitchell, he returns fire, she continues and his eyes return to normal)
Hurry. You haven't much time.
Gary, forgive me.
For a moment, James, but your moment is fading.
I'm sorry. You can't know what it's like to be almost a god.
Enterprise from Captain Kirk, come in.
Captain's log, Star date 1313.8. Add to official losses, Doctor Elizabeth Dehner. Be it noted she gave her life in performance of her duty. Lieutenant Commander Gary Mitchell, same notation. I want his service record to end that way. He didn't ask for what happened to him.
I felt for him, too.
I believe there's some hope for you after all, Mister Spock.
The Naked Time
Check out the life-support systems.
Right, sir. All life systems were off, sir.
Someone strangled this woman.
Dead?
Right, sir.
Engineer at his post?
The rest?
Well, better look for yourself, Mister Spock. One man was taking a shower fully clothed. (they split up, he takes off his glove to scratch his nose then puts it on the console. Something orange jumps onto his skin. Feeling the cold he puts the glove back on)
Be certain we expose ourselves to nothing. Spock here. Do you read, Enterprise?
Kirk, affirmative.
All station personnel are dead.
What caused it?
Unknown, Captain. It's like nothing we've dealt with before.
You received my signal, Mister Scott.
Yes, sir. Decontaminate.
Captain here.
Spock and Tormolen aboard, sir.
We're holding them in the chamber for decontamination.
Better have Medicine look them over too. Tell Mister Spock I'll meet him there in ten minutes. Kirk out.
You're fine, Joe. Up and out of there. Mister Spock? Your pulse is two hundred and forty two, your blood pressure is practically nonexistent, assuming you call that green stuff in your veins blood.
The readings are perfectly normal for me, Doctor, thank you, and as for my anatomy being different from yours, I am delighted. Captain.
How are they?
They're fine, Jim.
Terrible, Captain. It was terrible. They were just sitting, like they didn't care. Whatever was happening, they didn't care. I keep wondering
You keep wondering if man was meant to be out here. You keep wondering, you keep signing on. Any guesses, Mister Spock? Any idea of what happened down there?
I wish I could say, Captain. The circumstances were quite bizarre, however our record tapes may show us something.
Six dead. Six people dead.
You'd better get some rest.
Yes, sir.
Set up those tapes, Mister Spock. We'll see if the answers are there. (leaves with Spock)
The lab status report, Doctor.
Oh, thank you, Christine.
Next tape, please.
Spectro-analysis tape, sir.
Thank you.
Almost as though they were irrational, drugged. An engineer sitting there, apparently oblivious to everything. A woman strangled. A crewman with a phaser pistol in his hand.
He'd used the computer room as if it were an amusement gallery.
And a fully clothed man frozen to death in a shower. If the image wasn't so ugly, it would be laughable. Not even a theory, gentlemen?
Definitely not drugs or intoxication. The bio-analysis on the tapes prove that conclusively.
It could be some form of space madness we've never heard of, but it would have to be caused by something. Our spectro-readings showed no contamination, no unusual elements present.
Or at least none your tricorders could register.
Instruments register only those things they're designed to register. Space still contains infinite unknowns.
Earth Science needs the closest possible measurement of the breakup of this planet. To do this, we need the Enterprise in a critically tight orbit. Question. Could what happened down there to those people create any unusual danger to this vessel and crew?
We will need top efficiency, Captain. It'll be a tricky orbit. When the planet begins to go, there may be drastic changes in gravity, mass, magnetic field.
The purpose of a briefing, gentlemen, is to get me answers based on your abilities and experience. In a critical orbit, there's no time for surprise.
Unless you people on the Bridge start taking showers with your clothes on, my engines can pull us out of anything. We'll be warping out of orbit within a half second of getting your command.
Bridge to Captain.
Kirk here.
Scanners report sudden four degree shift in planet magnetic field. A change in mass also, sir.
It's beginning. Unusually rapid shifts.
On our way, Lieutenant. I'll hold you to that half second, Scotty.
Foil. It's a rapier. A thin sword.
All right. So what do you do with it?
What do you mean, what do you do with it?
Self-defence? Mayhem? Shish kebab?
You practice.
For what?
Hi, Joey.
Last week it was botany he was trying to get me interested in. I was supposed to be collecting leaves, plant specimens.
Your attitude is all wrong. Fencing tones the muscle, sharpens the eye, improves the posture. You tell him, Joey. Explain to him. Hey, Joey. You feeling all right?
Get off me! You don't rank me and you don't have pointed ears, so just get off my neck!
What's with him?
Nothing!
Attention. Engine room on standby alert. All duty personnel to the Bridge. Acknowledge.
You sure you're all right now, Joe? We've got to leave.
We're all a bunch of hypocrites. Sticking our noses into something that we've got no business. What are we doing out here, anyway?
Take it easy, Joe.
We bring pain and trouble with us, leave men and women stuck out on freezing planets until they die. What are we doing out here in space? Good? What good? We're polluting it, destroying it. We've got no business being out here. No business.
Take it easy, Joe.
Now calm down.
If a man was supposed to fly, he'd have wings. If he was supposed to be out in space, he wouldn't need air to breathe, wouldn't need life-support systems to keep him from freezing to death.
Hey, Joey, put the knife down, huh?
You're all steamed up, Joe.
We don't belong here. It's not ours. Not ours. Destroying and watching. We don't belong. I don't belong. Six people died down there. Why do I deserve to live?
What are you doing, Joe?
Hey, Joey, put the knife down. (grabs his arm) Don't be a fool.
Let go!
You're just getting in a sweat about (three men struggle) Let me have the knife!
Joey, don't be a fool.
Let me go.
Joey, give me the knife. (they fall to the floor, Tormolen gets stabbed in the stomach) Emergency! Rec room, area three nine. We need medics!
Relative gravity increasing, sir.
Compensate, Mister Riley.
Yes, sir.
Magnetic field continuing to shift, sir. Planet continuing to shrink in mass.
Mister Spock?
All scanning stations manned, all recorders functioning, Captain.
Orbit steady now, sir.
Obviously, this planet is condensing more rapidly than expected. A valuable study. We may be seeing Earth's distant future. Before its sun went dark, this planet was remarkably similar to yours.
Helm answering nicely, Captain.
Good.
Communications status, Captain.
Tormolen's record?
Psychiatric file, personality quotients.
Was he trying to kill himself?
It's doubtful he meant to. He was confused, self-tortured.
Doesn't sound like the man I know.
His capacity for self-doubt has always been rather high. What puzzles me is what brought it to the surface with so much force.
His breathing rate is dropping, Doctor.
Compensate with the respirator. Stand by to close. Closing.
What is it?
Relative gravity increase, sir. Like the planet reached out and yanked at us.
Compensate. (adjusts Riley's controls) Compensate.
Orbit steady now, sir. May be a little nervous, I guess.
This shouldn't be happening. This man should be getting stronger. You sure the respirator's functioning properly?
Yes, Doctor.
Why is this man dying? Hypo.
He's dead, Doctor.
The wounds were not that severe.
This is McCoy. Captain Kirk to Sickbay.
Uhura, monitor communications. Tell McCoy I'll be there when I can.
Yes, sir.
Planet breakup is imminent, Captain. Shrinking in size at an increasing rate. As the planet continues to shrink in size, its surface moves away from us.
Forcing us to spiral down to maintain the same distance from it.
Exactly. We must be prepared to respond instantly to any sudden change.
Engine room from Bridge.
Scott here, Captain.
Tie into the helm, Scotty. If we should call for power, we'll want it fast.
No problem, sir. You'll have it.
Rate of compaction seems constant.
Then I'll go see what the good doctor wants. Keep me informed of any change, Mister Spock.
Acknowledged.
Don't know if it's this planet or what happened with Joe. I'm sweating like a bridegroom.
Yeah, me too.
Hey, why don't you come down to the gym with me, Kevin m'lad?
Now?
Why not? Light workout will take the edge off.
Sulu, what about. Hey, Sulu, don't be a fool!
Intestinal damage wasn't that severe. I got to him in plenty of time. That man should still be alive. The only reason he died, Jim, is he didn't want to live. He gave up.
That's a supposition, Doctor, not a fact.
Well, that may be. Maybe. I've lost patients before, but not like that. Not Joe's kind. That kind of man doesn't give up.
Coincidence? Maybe.
You mean that Joe was down on the planet surface and you're gonna ask me if it's connected.
That's exactly what I was going to ask.
Jim, he was decontaminated. He's been medically checked. We've run every test we know for everything we know.
That's not good enough.
Well, we're doing everything that's possible.
Bones, I want the impossible checked out too.
Why isn't Mister Sulu at this station?
Magnetic pull compensated for, sir. Orbit steady.
Take over here, Rand. (a male, not Janice)
Yes, sir.
You haven't answered my question. Where is Mister Sulu?
Have no fear, O'Riley's here. One Irishman is worth ten thousand of you
You're relieved, Mister Riley. Lieutenant Uhura, take over this station.
Yes, sir.
Now that's what I like. Let the women work too. Universal suffrage.
Report to Sickbay, Mister Riley.
Sickbay? Exactly where I was heading, sir.
Security. Mister Riley is headed for Sickbay. See to it he arrives. Captain Kirk to the Bridge.
Where's Joe?
Well.
He died, didn't he.
Yes.
You know something? You have such lovely eyes, pretty lady. (touches her face)
I know he was a friend of yours. This must be a terrible shock.
You know what Joe's mistake was? He wasn't born an Irishman.
(brandishing foil) Richelieu, beware! Stand. No farther. No escape for you. You either leave this bois bloodied, or with my blood on your swords. Cowards!
Lieutenant Brent, relieve Miss Uhura.
What were their symptoms?
Nonviolent at this stage. Slightly disoriented. Riley seemed rather pleased with himself, as if he were
Irrational, or drugged.
Precisely.
Security, Lieutenant Uhura.
Yes, sir.
Both Sulu and Riley, locate and confine. I want every crewman who comes in contact with them medically checked.
Sir, level two, corridor three reports a disturbance. Mister Sulu chasing crewmen with a sword.
Put Security on it.
Fascinating. A pattern is developing. First, Tormolen. Hidden personality traits being forced to the surface. Then Riley, who fancies himself a descendant of Irish kings, and now Sulu, who is at heart a swashbuckler out of your 18th century.
Present condition of Psi 2000.
Gravity pull increasing. We've shifted to two percent and should stabilise our position.
Helmsman, stabilise position.
Helm is not answering to control.
Warp us out of here.
No response from engines, sir.
Impulse power then. Blast us out of this orbit.
Impulse engines also dead, sir.
Engine room, we need power!
Mister Scott, acknowledge. Our controls are dead. Take her.
Richelieu, at last.
Sulu, put that (discovers that the point is sharp) put that thing away.
For honour, Queen, and France! (lunges)
Sulu.
Ah.
Sulu, give me that.
I'll protect you, fair maiden.
Sorry, neither.
Foul Richelieu. (distracted by Uhura's escape, Kirk is able to grab Sulu and Spock does a neck-pinch)
I'd like you to teach me that sometime.
Take D'Artagnon here to Sickbay.
Scotty, we need power. Engine room, acknowledge!
You rang, sir?
Who's this?
This is Captain Kevin Thomas Riley of the starship Enterprise.
And who is this?
This is Captain Kirk. Get out of the engine room, navigator. Where's Mister Scott?
I've relieved Mister Scott of his duties. Now, attention, cooks. This is your captain speaking. I would like double portions of ice cream for the entire crew.
Clear that tube, will you?
Yes, sir.
And now, your captain will render an ancient Irish favourite. (sings) I'll take you home again Kathleen
Captain. At our present rate of descent, we have less than twenty minutes before we enter planet atmosphere.
And burn up. I know, Mister Spock.
Wild and wide to where your heart
How did Riley get in there?
He ran in, said you wanted us on the Bridge.
He's cut off both helm and power.
And he shut the door behind us and locked off the mechanism.
Can't you get to the auxiliary?
I can't. He's hooked everything through the main panel in there. Get up to my office and pull the plans for this bulkhead. The only way to get that door open is to cut through these wall circuits here.
(singing) The roses all have left your cheeks. I've watched them fade away and die
Status reports, all sections.
Mister Spock, a fight in the aft wardroom. Security reports incidents among the crewmen are increasing.
Go to Alert Baker two. Seal off main sections.
All decks, alert system B two. Repeat, go to alert condition Baker two. Seal off all main sections. Stand by.
We're going to seal off, Captain, if we can minimise the spread of whatever this is.
Continue the alert, Lieutenant.
I can't, sir. He's cut off the alert channels.
Lieutenant Uhura,
You've interrupted my song. I'm sorry, but there'll be no ice cream for you tonight.
Cut him off.
I can't, sir. There's no way to do it.
Attention, crew. This is Captain Riley. There will be a formal dance in the bowling alley at nineteen hundred hours tonight.
No way, Captain. He controls the main power panels. He can override any channel from down there. Seventeen minutes left, sir. (ship is jolted severely)
Sickbay to Bridge.
Can you tie me in to the Sickbay?
I'm getting you, Jim. Look, can you keep this beast level? I've got Sulu tranquillized and we're running tests on him.
So far there's nothing unusual in his bloodstream. Body functions seem normal.
Riley's the immediate problem, Doctor. Is there any way, anything you can do to snap him out of it?
Negative, until I can get a little farther on these tests.
This is Captain Riley. Crew, I have some additional orders.
In the future, all female crew members will wear their hair loosely, about their shoulders.
And use restraint in putting on your makeup. Women, women should not look made up. And now, crew, I will render Kathleen one more time!
Please, not again.
(singing) I'll take you home again, Kathleen (meanwhile, Scott is working in a Jefferies tube) I've watched them fade away and die.
I've set the jumpers up there. Stand by 'til I give you a signal.
And tears bedim your loving eyes. Oh,
I will take you home Kathleen.
Engineering to Bridge. Try your helm. You'll have enough power to keep her stabilised. Here, let's have a look at that.
Sixteen minutes left, Captain. We've stabilised, but still spiraling down.
Emergency signal, Captain. Both decks four and five. Fights and disorders.
Get me Sickbay.
I have no intercom for Sickbay. He keeps switching channels on me.
See what you can do to help Doctor McCoy. Better check Scotty first. Move him faster. He's got to get through that bulkhead.
What's going on?
Mister Spock, I'm trying to get to the Bridge and this crewman won't let me by.
Crewman, stand aside.
Spock!
Message from the captain.
Tell him I'm doing my best. If I cut through the wrong circuits
We have fourteen minutes left.
Even if we were under a full-scale attack I couldn't move any faster, not and maintain a safety factor.
At the rate you're proceeding, calculations show that you'll take a minute and a half more than we have left. You can't afford a safety factor.
Biopsy lab. Biopsy, where's my report? Biopsy, come in! Harrison, where's my report? I'm going to the lab.
Sir?
Yes?
The tranquillizer's wearing off.
Oh, good. I'll need him conscious now. Continue to examine him on circuits K one and three.
Of course, Doctor.
Get him out of here.
I would have gotten here sooner, sir but Crewman Moody stopped me in the hallway.
Take the helm.
Sir?
Take the helm!
Yes, sir.
Kathleen. And now, crew, one more time!
At least try cutting him off!
Sir, if I could cut him off, don't you think I
I'll take you home again Kathleen
Yes, sir. I'll keep trying.
Sorry.
Across the ocean wild and wide
Scotty.
Engine room.
We've got twelve minutes left. It'll take at least two or three of them to get the engines up to power now.
Then we'll make it, sir, if all goes right.
Call me when you've cut through. I want to be there. Kirk out.
Nurse? Where is Doctor McCoy?
He's gone to the lab.
Lab. Lab, respond please. Spock here. Lab!
Mister Spock.
What is it, Nurse?
Mister Spock, (takes his hand) the men from Vulcan treat their women strangely. At least, people say that, but you're part human too. I know you don't, you couldn't, hurt me, would you? I'm in love with you, Mister Spock. You, the human Mister Spock, the Vulcan Mister Spock.
Nurse, you should
Christine, please. I see things, how honest you are. I know how you feel. You hide it, but you do have feeling. Oh, how we must hurt you, torture you.
I'm in control of my emotions.
The others believe that. I don't. I love you. I don't know why, but I love you. I do love you just as you are. Oh, I love you.
I'm sorry.
Captain is en route to Engineering, Mister Spock. Can you take the bridge? Acknowledge.
I am sorry.
Christine.
Christine.
Bridge to Sickbay. Is Mister Spock there?
Mister Spock, would you please acknowledge? (Spock is struggling to keep his control)
I will take you home Kathleen
Almost ready, sir.
To where your heart will feel no pain. When the fields are fresh and green. I'll take you to your home
- Ready, sir.
(to Security) Follow me through. Put your phasers on stun. Don't fire unless he's armed. Go.
I'll take. No dance tonight.
Get him out of here.
(close to tears) I'm in control of my emotions. Control of my emotions. I am an officer. An officer. My duty. My duty is, is. My duty is to, to. Too late. I'm sorry. To. Two, four, six. Six. Six times six.
Scotty, we haven't got much time left.
Bridge to Captain.
Kirk here.
Entering planet's outer atmosphere, sir.
Captain.
What is it?
He's turned the engines off. Completely cold. It will take thirty minutes to regenerate them.
Ship's outer skin is beginning to heat, Captain. Orbit plot shows we have about eight minutes left.
Scotty!
I can't change the laws of physics. I've got to have thirty minutes.
Maybe twenty two, twenty three minutes.
Scotty, we've got six.
Captain, you can't mix matter and antimatter cold. We'd go up in the biggest explosion since
We can balance our engines into a controlled implosion.
That's only a theory. It's never been done.
Bridge, have you found Mister Spock yet?
If you wanted to chance odds of ten thousand to one, maybe, assuming we had a row of computers working weeks on the right formula.
Mister Spock is not on the Bridge, Captain.
(waking up screaming) I was on the Bridge. Hey Doc, what am I doing here?
McCoy to Bio. We've isolated it. Start preparing serum.
It's water. Somehow on this planet, water's changed to a complex chain of molecules.
That's how we missed it. It passed from man to man through perspiration. Once in the bloodstream, it acts like alcohol, depresses the centres of judgment, self-control. Now get someone to the lab. Tell them the serum works, and start preparing more.
Doc, will you let me out of here? I'm all right.
Release him.
Engineers, man your stations. Engine rooms, report. Cycling station, report. This will be an emergency restart of engines.
Where have you been? What happened?
My mother. I could never tell her I loved her.
We've got four minutes, maybe five.
An Earth woman, living on a planet where love, emotion, is bad taste.
We've got to risk a full-power start. The engines were shut off. No time to regenerate them. Do you hear me? We've got to risk a full-power start!
I respected my father, our customs. I was ashamed of my Earth blood. (Kirk slaps him) Jim, when I feel friendship for you, I'm ashamed.
(hitting him repeatedly) You've got to hear me! We need a formula. We've got to risk implosion!
t's never been done! Understand, Jim. I've spent a whole lifetime learning to hide my feelings. (finally hits Kirk back)
We've got to risk implosion. It's our only chance.
It's never been done.
Don't tell me that again, Science Officer! It's a theory. It's possible. We may go up into the biggest ball of fire since the last sun in these parts exploded, but we've got to take that one in ten thousand chance!
Bridge to Captain. Engineer asked, did you find
Yes, I found Mister Spock! I'm talking to Mister Spock, do you understand?
Yes, sir. Three and a half minutes left, Captain.
I've got it, the disease. Love. You're better off without it, and I'm better off without mine. This vessel, I give, she takes. She won't permit me my life. I've got to live hers.
Jim.
I have a beautiful yeoman. Have you noticed her, Mister Spock? You're allowed to notice her. The Captain's not permitted
Jim, there is an intermix formula.
Now I know why it's called she.
It's never been tested. It's a theoretical relationship between time and antimatter.
Flesh woman to touch, to hold. A beach to walk on. A few days, no braid on my shoulder.
Captain.
Scotty, help.
Stand by to intermix. I'll call the formulae in from the Bridge.
Entering upper stratosphere, Captain. Skin temperature now twenty one hundred seventy degrees.
I've got to hang on. Tell them. Clear the corridors, the turbo lift. Hurry. (Scott and Spock leave) Never lose you. Never.
Bridge.
Engine room. We're set. Hyperbolic course.
Direction. Direction. It doesn't matter. The way we came.
Course laid in, sir.
Fuel temperature.
Level.
(gazing at Janice) No beach to walk on.
Sir?
Raise antimatter eight and forty degrees.
That'll take four minutes.
We haven't the time. We'll have to risk it. Bridge, we're ready.
Engage.
Are you all right, Jim?
Are you? (Spock nods)
We found a cure. We're over that part of it.
Obviously, we were successful. The engines imploded.
Captain, my velocity gauge is off the scale.
Engine power went off the scale as well. We're now travelling faster than is possible for normal space.
Checked elapsed time, Mister Sulu.
My chronometer's running backwards, sir.
Time warp. We're going backward in time. Helm, begin reversing power. Slowly.
Helm answering, sir. Power reversing.
We're back to normal time, Captain.
Engines ahead. Warp one.
Warp one, sir.
Mister Spock.
Yes, sir.
The time warp. What did it do to us?
We've regressed in time seventy one hours. It is now three days ago, Captain. We have three days to live over again.
Not those last three days.
This does open some intriguing prospects, Captain. Since the formula worked, we can go back in time, to any planet, any era.
We may risk it someday, Mister Spock. Resume course to our next destination, Mister Sulu.
Course laid in, sir.
Steady as she goes.
The Enemy Within
That should make a good specimen.
(holding pink animal with a horn) Temperature's starting to drop.
Yeah. At night it gets down to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero.
That's nippy. 
Hey!
What happened?
I fell off that bank, sir. Cut my hand.
Let's see it. Get back to the ship. Report to the Sickbay.
Yes, sir. Geological Technician Fisher. Ready to beam up.
Right. Locked onto you. Energise. Coadjutor engagement.
What happened?
I took a flop.
Onto what?
I don't know. Some kind of yellow ore.
Magnetic. Decontaminate that uniform.
Yes, sir. (;eaves)
That acted like a burnout.
Captain Kirk ready to beam up.
Just one moment, Captain. It checks out okay now. You better go get a synchronic meter so we can double-check.
Yes sir.
All right, Captain. Locked onto you. (Kirk stumbles as he leaves the platform) Are you all right, Captain?
Yes, I'm all right. Just a little dizzy.
Let me give you a hand.
I can't get through there. Nothing serious. Don't leave the transporter room unattended.
Wilson will be right back, sir.
Captain? Are you all right, sir? Can I give you a hand, sir? Captain?
Bridge to all decks. Section duty officers, check communication lines.
Thank you.
It might profit you to let Doctor McCoy give you the once-over.
All right, Engineer, I'll have my engines looked to.
Ship's manifests, sir. I think they're in order now.
Thank you, Yeoman.
I've checked
That's all.
Yes, sir. (leaves Kirk to lie down on bed)
You picked a good day, Fisher. Business has been lousy. What'd you do, take a fall on purpose so you could get a little vacation?
Saurian brandy.
No, sir. The hand's much better, sir. (leaves)
What can I do for you, Jim?
(grabbing him by the neck) I said, give me the brandy! (leaves with bottle and goes to Rand's quarters)
Yeah.
Mister Spock.
Come in. Yes, Mister Spock, what is it?
Is there something I can do for you, Captain?
Like what?
Well, Doctor McCoy seemed to think I should check on you.
That's nice. Come on, Spock, I know that look. What is it?
Well, our good doctor said that you were acting like a wild man, demanded brandy.
Our good doctor's been putting you on again.
Hmm. Well, in that case, if you'll excuse the intrusion Captain, I'll get back to my work.
I'll tell him you were properly annoyed.
Captain.
What is it, Scotty?
Transporter breakdown. Continue circuit testing. We beamed up this animal and, well, look for yourself. It's in this specimen case. (opens lid to reveal angry pink animal)
Yes?
A few seconds after they sent this one up through the transporter, that duplicate appeared. Except it's not a duplicate, it's an opposite. Two of the same animal, but different. One gentle, this. One mean and fierce, that. Some kind of savage, ferocious opposite. Captain, we don't dare send Mister Sulu and the landing party up. If this should happen to a man.
Oh, my.
Oh! Captain, you startled me. Is there something that you? Can I help you, Captain?
Jim will do here, Janice.
Oh.
You're too beautiful to ignore. Too much woman. We've both been pretending too long. (grabs her) Stop pretending. Let's stop pretending. Come here, Janice. Don't fight me. Don't fight me, Janice. (kisses her)
Captain!
Just a minute, Janice. Just a minute! (forces her onto the floor, she scratches his face and gets away to the door which opens just as Fisher is passing by)
Call Mister Spock! Call Mister Spock!
Geological Technician Fisher. Deck twelve, section (Kirk grabs him and hits him, hard)
Me? My yeoman said that? I've been resting here since you left me. Alone, Mister Spock.
Doctor McCoy reports that you demanded this brandy in Sickbay and left with it. I found this bottle in Yeoman Rand's quarters.
Not true. I haven't been to the Sickbay. Let's find out what's going on.
Sickbay. (just missing the other Kirk nursing grazed knuckles, who goes into his quarters)
Then he kissed me and he said that we, that he was the Captain and he could order me. I didn't know what to do. When you mentioned the feelings we'd been hiding, and you started talking about us.
Us?
Well, he is the captain. I couldn't just. You started hurting me. I had to fight you, and scratch your face.
Yeoman, look at me. Look at me, look at my face. Are there any scratches?
I was sure I scratched you. I was frightened. Maybe
Yeoman. I was in my room. It wasn't me.
Sir, Fisher saw you, too.
Fisher saw?
If it hadn't been. I can understand. I don't want to get you into trouble. I wouldn't have even mentioned it!
It wasn't me!
It was you, sir.
Do you know what you're saying?
Yes, I know what I'm saying.
Back to that bed, bucko. Come on, let's go.
You can go now, Yeoman. (Rand leaves) There's only one logical answer. We have an impostor aboard.
How did all this happen?
I don't know sir, but when Fisher came up, his suit was covered with a soft yellow ore that had highly unusual properties. It may have caused an overload. Can't tell, not yet.
Does the transporter work at all?
Yes sir, but we don't dare bring up the landing party. It might be duplicated like this animal.
How long will it take you to find the trouble?
Can't say, sir.
We just can't leave those four men down there. It's getting dark. They'll die. The surface temperature of that planet goes down to a hundred and twenty degrees below zero at night.
We're doing everything we can, sir.
Yes, I know, Scotty.
About your double, Captain.
Yes, er, yes, we'll have to find him. Search parties, Mister Spock. Organise search parties.
We can't take a chance on killing it. We have no previous experience, no way of knowing what would happen to you.
Yes, that's right. We don't know, but the men have to be armed. The men are to be armed, with their phasers locked, I repeat, locked, on setting number one. There can't be any chance of him being killed. He's to be taken without. If the men are forced to fire, he can't be killed.
How shall we explain it to them, Captain? The search parties are to capture you?
Tell them.
The search parties, Captain.
Yes, I'll make an announcement to the entire crew, tell them what happened. It's a good crew. They deserve to know.
Captain, no disrespect intended, but you must surely realise you can't announce the full truth to the crew. You're the Captain of this ship. You haven't the right to be vulnerable in the eyes of the crew. You can't afford the luxury of being anything less than perfect. If you do, they lose faith, and you lose command.
Yes, I do know that, Mister Spock. What I don't know is why I forgot that just now. Mister Spock, if you see me slipping again, your orders, your orders are to tell me.
Understood, Captain.
This is the Captain speaking. There's an impostor aboard the ship, a man who looks exactly like me and is pretending to be me. This man is dangerous. Utmost caution is to be observed. All crew members are to arm themselves. The impostor may be identified by scratches on his face. Repeat, the impostor may be identified by scratches on his face.
Section chiefs, assign personnel to the search. All search parties
report to Mister Spock for assignment.
Something?
About the phaser weapons to be set for stunning force and locked.
Oh, yes, yes. All hand phasers must be set on base cycle, stunning force.
The impostor is not to be injured. Use minimum force. Repeat, the imposter
I'm Captain Kirk!
Is not to be injured.
I'm Captain Kirk. I'm Captain Kirk! I'm Captain Kirk! I'm Captain Kirk! (goes to mirror, covers scratches with makeup, opens door) Wilson!
Sir?
Wilson, give me your phaser.
Yes, sir.
How have you been?
Fine, sir. (Kirk grabs and hits him)
How's it going down there, Mister Sulu?
It's already twenty degrees below zero. Can't exactly
call it balmy.
Isn't there any way we can help them?
Thermal heaters were transported down. They duplicated. They won't operate.
Then we've got to get those men up.
Mister Spock?
Spock here.
Transporter Technician Wilson found injured near the Captain's cabin. He says the impostor attacked him, called him by name, took his hand phaser.
Acknowledged. Continue the search.
We've got to find him before he, but how?
Apparently, this double, however different in temperament, has your knowledge of the ship, its crew, its devices. This being the case, perhaps we can outguess him by determining his next move. Knowing how the ship is laid out, where would you go to elude a mass search?
The lower levels. The Engineering deck.
Set and locked on base cycle to stun, not to kill. What about your phaser, Captain? Don't you think we ought to get some help, Captain?
No. I don't want anyone else to see the
Captain, you ordered me to tell you.
Mister Spock, if I'm to be the Captain, I've got to act like one.
You can't hurt me. You can't kill me. You can't. Don't you understand? I'm part of you. You need me. I need you.
He'll be regaining consciousness soon, and not knowing what his physical state is, I don't think I dare give him a tranquilizer of any kind. I think we'd better bind him.
Yes. yes, all right. What's the matter with me?
Judging from my observations, Captain, you're rapidly losing the power of decision.
You have a point, Spock?
Yes, always, Doctor. We have here an unusual opportunity to appraise the human mind, or to examine, in Earth terms, the roles of good and evil in a man. His negative side, which you call hostility, lust, violence, and his positive side, which Earth people express as compassion, love, tenderness.
It's the Captain's guts you're analysing. Are you of that, Spock?
Yes, and what is it that makes one man an exceptional leader? We see indications that it's his negative side which makes him strong, that his evil side, if you will, properly controlled and disciplined, is vital to his strength. Your negative side removed from you, the power of command begins to elude you.
What is your point, Mister Spock?
If your power of command continues to weaken, you'll soon be unable to function as Captain. You must be prepared for that.
You have your intellect, Jim. You can fight with that!
For how long?
If I seem insensitive to what you're going through, Captain, understand it's the way I am.
Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Mister Scott, sir, on the lower level of the Engineering deck.
I've found a new trouble with the transporter. The casing has a wide gap ripped in it. (the phaser damage) The main circuits
have been burned through. The abort control circuit is gone altogether.
Can you give us a status report, Captain? Temperature's still dropping. Now forty one degrees below zero.
We've located the trouble. It shouldn't be much longer.
Do you think you might be able to find a long rope somewhere and lower us down a pot of hot coffee?
I'll see what we can do.
Rice wine will do, if you're short on coffee.
Engineering deck, Kirk here.
Scott here, Captain.
That unit, Scotty, status report.
The transporter unit ioniser. Nothing much left of it, sir.
How bad is it?
We can't repair it in less than a week.
(using phaser to heat rocks) I think we ought to give room service another call. That coffee's taking too long. Enterprise, this is Sulu.
Kirk here, Mister Sulu.
Hot line direct to the Captain. Are we that far gone?
I gave everybody the afternoon off. I'm watching the store.
How is it down there?
Oh, lovely, except that the frost is building up. We're using hand phasers to heat the rocks. One phaser quit on us, three still operating. Any possibility of getting us back aboard before the skiing season opens down here?
This is Spock, Mister Sulu. You'll have to hold on a little longer. There's no other way. Survival procedures, Mister Sulu.
Per your training programme, Mister Spock.
What happened?
Apparently the body functioning weakened during the duplication process. A fact I failed to consider.
He's not dying?
Yes, he is.
How can he die? Can I survive without him?
I don't know, Jim.
Don't be afraid. Here's my hand. Hold on. You don't have to be afraid. I won't let go. Hold on. You won't be afraid if you use your mind and think! Think! You can do it. That's it!
Jim, he is back! Jim, you can use that brandy now. In fact, I'll join you.
I have to take him back inside myself. I can't survive without him. I don't want him back. He's like an animal, a thoughtless, brutal animal, and yet it's me. Me.
Jim, you're no different than anyone else. We all have our darker side. We need it! It's half of what we are. It's not really ugly, it's human.
Human.
Yes, human. A lot of what he is makes you the man you are. God forbid I should have to agree with Spock, but he was right. Without the negative side, you wouldn't be the Captain. You couldn't be, and you know it. Your strength of command lies mostly in him.
What do I have?
You have the goodness.
Not enough. I have a ship to command.
The intelligence, the logic. It appears your half has most of that, and perhaps that's where man's essential courage comes from. For you see, he was afraid and you weren't.
Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Spock here. Would you come to the transporter room. We think we may have found an answer.
Coming.
What is it?
We've found a way to get the transporter working, sir.
We've attached some bypass and leader circuits to compensate for the difference. Tied directly into the impulse engines, there shouldn't be more than a five point variation in the velocity balance. I suggest we send the animal through. Captain.
Yes, yes. Go ahead.
(opening box with angry animal in it) I'll grab him by the scruff of the neck and hold him as long as I can.
Don't hurt him.
It's painless and quick. The animal will be unconscious for only a few minutes. (sedates it)
If this doesn't work, I don't know what will.
Energise. Reverse.
The shock of putting him back together seems to have been too much for him.
He's dead, Jim.
Autopsy in-depth. Hurry. I don't know. Animal could have died of some kind of shock.
For once, I agree with you.
I said could have, Mister Spock. We won't know until we get a full post-mortem.
No autopsy is necessary to know that the animal was terrified, confused. It was split into two halves and suddenly thrust back together again. Thus shock induced by blind terror.
Yes, yes, that sounds likely.
It couldn't understand. You can. You have your intelligence controlling your fear.
Get the transporter room ready.
Could be, if, maybe. All guesswork so far. Just theory. Jim, why don't you give me a chance to do an autopsy and let Spock check the transporter circuits again.
That sounds, sounds reasonable. We should double-check everything.
Aren't you forgetting something, Captain?
No, I don't think I've for
Your men on the planet surface. How much time do they have left?
Yes, that's right. The men. We have to take the chance, Bones. Their lives
Suppose it wasn't shock, Jim. Suppose death was caused by transporter malfunction. Then you'd die. They'd die, anyway. Jim, you can't risk your life on a theory!
Being split in two halves is no theory with me, Doctor. I have a human half, you see, as well as an alien half, submerged, constantly at war with each other. Personal experience, Doctor. I survive it because my intelligence wins over both, makes them live together. Your intelligence would enable you to survive as well.
Help me. Somebody make the decision.
Are you relinquishing your command, Captain?
No. No, I'm not.
Well then, we can't help you, Jim. The decision is yours.
Mister Spock, ready the transporter room. Bones, continue the autopsy.
Captain Kirk, I have a tie-in with Sulu now.
Kirk here.
Captain K-Kirk, Sulu here. One hundred seventeen below. Can't last much longer.
Can't see clearly, Doctor, to read top indicator. Think the cold penetrating communicator. Two men unconscious. No time. No. Can't wait. No time.
Mister Sulu. Mister Sulu. Can't wait. Can't let them die.
Go through the transporter, both of us.
It's what I have to do. It's what I have to do. What we have to do.
Janice, hello.
Captain, I
Yeoman, I owe you an explanation.
No.
Yes, I do. The transporter malfunctioned, divided me, created a duplicate. The animal part of me came to your cabin. He even scratched me to make us look more alike. I'd like the chance to explain it to you. You don't mind if I come to your cabin later?
No, sir.
(enters turbolift) Bridge.
No word from Mister Sulu, sir.
Captain!
But what about
Yes, sir.
Captain, I thought the plan
No!
He (the one in the captain's chair) attacked him.
Mister Spock, which one? What do we do?
We'll let the captain handle this.
Yes, I know.
Can half a man live?
Then we'll both die.
You will. Both of us.
You'll have to hold on to him, Captain.
Mister Spock.
Captain?
If this doesn't work.
Understood, Captain.
Mister Spock.
Ready. (beams them out)
Well, Mister Spock? (one figure is beamed back) Jim?
Get those men aboard fast.
Right away, Captain.
(as the party is wheeled away) Severe exposure and frostbite, but I think they'll make it. How do you feel, Jim?
How? I've seen a part of myself no man should ever see.
Status report, green.
All sections report ready, sir.
Good. Thank you, Mister Spock, from both of us.
Shall I pass that on to the crew, sir?
The impostor's back where he belongs. Let's forget him.
Captain? The impostor told me what happened, who he really was, and I'd just like to say that. Well, sir, what I'd like is
Thank you, Yeoman.
The, er, impostor had some interesting qualities, wouldn't you say, Yeoman?
This is the Captain speaking. Navigator, set in course correction. Helmsman, steady as she goes.
Mudd's Women
There he is, sir. Centre screen. Still trying to run away from us, sir.
Don't lose him, Mister Sulu.
No, sir.
Earth ship, Mister Spock?
Difficult to say, Captain. We're getting no registration beam from it.
If it is, he'll soon overload his engines.
Sir, he's pushing his engines too hard.
Changing course again. He knows we're after him all right.
Stay with him, Mister Sulu. Communication?
I've tried all frequencies, sir. He refuses to answer. Unless he's not receiving us.
He's receiving us alright.
Approaching an asteroid belt, Captain. Schiller rating three five.
Deflectors on, Mister Farrell.
He's seen the asteroids too, sir.
Stay with him. He'll try to lose us in them.
If one hits him.
Sensor reading on the vessel. I make it out as a small class J cargo ship, and his engines are super-heating.
Try to warn him. If he loses power now
There go his engines, sir.
He's drifting into the asteroid belt, Captain.
He's had it, unless we put our deflector screen around him.
Captain, if we try, we'll overload our own engines. He's too far away.
Cover him with our deflector screen, Mister Farrell. Scotty, Spock, stand by in the transporter room.
Aye, sir. (they leave)
We're protecting him, sir. We won't be able to hold it long.
We're overloading, Captain. Engine temperatures climbing.
This is the Engine room. Temperatures are passing the danger line.
That was one of our lithium crystal circuits, sir.
Bridge to transporter room. If you don't start beaming that crew over soon
They're not answering our signal. There's nothing to lock onto.
I'm getting a distress signal call from them, sir.
Scotty, we're getting a distress signal.
We're locked onto something, Captain.
Meaning no ingratitude, gentlemen, but just where is it I find meself?
You're aboard the U.S.S. Enterprise.
It's really a darn beautiful ship, isn't it? Really a beautiful ship. Oh, the name, gentlemen, is Walsh, Captain Leo Walsh.
How many more in your crew?
Just a few more.
Your vessel's breaking up, man. If we don't get them over here right now
We couldn't be sure you was a friendly vessel, now could we. Ah, but the three will be in position about by now.
Another lithium circuit. Now supplementing with battery power, sir.
Scotty, how many of them did you get aboard?
Only one, sir, but we've locked onto three more.
What's wrong?
I don't know, sir. With those three lithium crystals gone
It'll take longer on battery power.
Never trusted this.
There she goes.
Asteroid hit him dead centre.
Bridge to transporter room. Their vessel has been hit by an asteroid. It's gone. Did you get the crew off?
Not yet, sir, but we've hooked onto something. (three women beam in, the men are transfixed)
Kirk to transporter room. Report.
It's all right, darlings. We're in good hands.
Bridge to transporter room.
We're clearing the asteroid belt now, Captain.
Deflector screen down, Mister Farrell. Save the power.
Captain to transporter room. Are you reading me or not, Mister Scott? Bridge to transporter room. How many did we get off?
Oh, er, four in all, sir.
If that captain can walk, I want him in my cabin immediately. Correction,
I want him there whether he can walk or not. Kirk out.
That fellow sounded a mite upset, didn't he?
Yes. Yes, they are.
Curious. You're certain this was everyone aboard, Mister Walsh? No other crewmen?
Oh, no, that's everyone, all right, but so far as the ladies actually being the crew
You can explain that to the Captain. (the group leave)
Amen to that, Scotty.
Ah, sure, these starships are really something marvellous, but men will always be men no matter where they are. Eh, mister? You'll never take that out of them.
Deck twelve.
You're part Vulcanian, aren't you. Ah well then, a pretty face doesn't affect you at all, does it. That is, unless you want it to. You can save it, girls. This type can turn himself off from any emotion.
I apologise for what he said, sir. He's used to buying and selling people.
I'll handle the conversation, darling.
Come.
The Commander of the transport to see you, Captain.
Good. Now, if you don't mind telling
Hello.
And the ladies? Is this your crew, Captain?
Well, no, Captain. This is me cargo.
Well, how the devil am I supposed to know this is a starship, Captain? Here I am with a cargo of young lovelies. A strange ship comes up alongside. Well. naturally I did my best to evade you. And starship Captain or no, you exceeded your authority when you drove me and mine into a shower of asteroids.
Your name, please.
Walsh. Leo Walsh. You destroyed me ship, Captain.
Mister Walsh, I'm convening a ship's hearing on your actions. Mister Spock will supply you with any legal information you may need for your defence.
You're a hard-nosed one, Captain.
And you're a liar, Mister Walsh. I think we both understand each other. Security! Escort Mister Walsh to his quarters. Confine him there.
You're on duty, Johnny-o. Back to reality.
You can feel their eyes when they look at you, like something grabbing hold of you. Did you notice that?
I noticed. How I noticed. Come on, Johnny.
We've got trouble, Mister Spock.
I'm well aware of that, Mister Scott.
One lithium crystal left, and that with a hairline split at the base.
Better rig a by-pass circuit.
Can't. We blew the whole converter assembly.
Kirk here.
Needed on the bridge, Captain.
Shh! Calm down now, darlings. Would you mind waiting outside?
Sorry, sir.
Well, now, answer every question they put to you. Don't lie. Well, you've no need to, have you, and don't submit to a med. That is, being so healthy, they've no need for a medical exam, have they.
What if they ask about
They won't. Have you no place to go lads?
They'll notice we're different.
No, no, no, they won't. Just let Leo take all the hard questions. Now don't be panicking, loves. We'll get to
Get where? We don't have a ship and we're headed the wrong way, Harry.
The entire ship's power is feeding through one lithium crystal.
Well, switch to by-pass circuits.
We burned them all out when we super-heated. That jackass Walsh not only wrecked his vessel, but in saving his skin
If it makes you feel better, Engineer, that's one jackass we're going to see skinned.
But it's frustrating. Almost a million gross tons of vessel depending on a hunk of crystal the size of my fist.
And that crystal won't hold up, not pulling all our power through it.
Well, Mister Spock?
There's a lithium mining operation on Rigel 12. High-grade ore, I've heard.
Location and distance.
Mister Farrell has the course. Less than two day's travel.
Make for Rigel 12, Mister Spock.
Rigel 12, Mister Farrell. You have the course.
This hearing is convened. Stardate 1329.2, on board starship U.S.S. Enterprise. Formal hearings against transport captain Leo Walsh. Start computer.
State your name for the record.
Leo Francis Walsh.
Incorrect.
Your correct name.
Gentlemen, surely you're not going to take the word of a soulless mechanical device over that of a real flesh and blood man.
State your correct name for the record.
Harry Mudd.
Incorrect.
Harcourt Fenton Mudd.
Any past offenses, Mister Mudd?
Of course not. Gentlemen, I'm simply an honest businessman.
Incorrect.
Blast that tin-plated pot.
Full data coming on screen.
If it can read our minds, too.
It can't, darling. It can't. Just what's on the record.
Offense record. Smuggling. Sentence suspended. Transport of stolen goods. Purchase of space vessel with counterfeit currency. Sentences, psychiatric treatment, effectiveness disputed.
Mister Mudd, you're charged with galaxy travel without a flight plan, without an identification beam, and failure to answer a starship's signal, thus effecting a menace to navigation.
What? My tiny ship in this immense galaxy a menace to navigation?
You're also charged with operation of a vessel without a master's license.
Untrue! I have a master's ticket.
Incorrect. Master's license revoked Stardate 1116.4.
All right. Well, very simply, Leo Walsh, who was to be my captain on this trip, passed away suddenly. Well, I had no choice but to take out me ship me own self. I assumed Leo's name out of courtesy to him. In memoriam, as it were. A fine, fine man, alas, gone to his reward.
Destination and purpose of journey?
Planet Ophiuchus 3. Wiving settlers.
Come again, Mister Mudd. You do what?
I recruit wives for settlers, a difficult but satisfying task.
Data on witnesses.
No data.
Computer, go to sensor probe. Any unusual readings?
No decipherable reading on females. However, unusual reading on male board members. Detecting high respiration patterns, perspiration rate up, heartbeat rapid, blood pressure higher than normal.
Er, that's sufficient. Strike that from the record.
You see, gentlemen, just as I told you. Three lovely ladies destined for frontier planets to be the companions of lonely men, to supply that warmth of a human touch that's so desperately needed. A wife, a home, a family. Gentlemen, I look upon this work as a sacred public trust. I've devoted me whole life to it.
Incorrect.
Well, I'm about to start devoting my entire life to it.
Did these ladies come voluntarily?
Well, of course! Now, for example, Ruthie here comes from a pelagic planet, sea ranchers. Magda there from the helium experimental station.
It's the same story for all of us, Captain. No men. Mine was a farm planet with automated machines for company and two brothers to cook for, mend their clothes, canal mud a foot thick on their boots every time they walked in.
Fine, Evie. Fine.
It's not fine! We've got men willing to be our husbands waiting for us, and you're taking us in the opposite direction! Staring at us Iike we were Saturnius harem girls or something.
That's enough, Evie.
The only charges are against Mister Mudd. Illegal operation of a vessel. Do you have any defence to offer?
Only heaven's own truth, which I've just given you.
The hearing is closed. Mister Mudd to be handed over to the legal authorities at our earliest opportunity.
And what about us? What happens to us? Help us, please. All of us.
Miss McHuron, if you don't mind
Our last crystal, sir. It's gone.
Captain Kirk, engineering section reports our entire life-support system is now on batteries.
Mister Spock. Miss McHuron, would you mind. Mister Spock, will you contact the miners on Rigel 12? Notify them that we'll need the lithium crystals immediately upon arrival. (all officers leave)
Oh, you beautiful galaxy! Oh, that heavenly universe! Well, girls, lithium miners. Don't you understand? Lonely, isolated, overworked, rich lithium miners! Girls, do you still want husbands, hmm? Evie, you won't be satisfied with a mere ship's captain. I'll get you a man who can buy you a whole planet. Maggie, you're going to be a countess. Ruth, I'll make you a duchess. And I, I'll be running this starship. Captain James Kirk, the next orders you're taking will be given by Harcourt Fenton Mudd!
May I come in?
Why, yes, please do. By all means. Connors, are you finished?
I was wondering what this place looked like. It's fascinating.
Would, Would you walk past my panel again, please?
Your what?
My medical scanner.
Oh, why? You're not giving me an examination, are you?
Oh no. I wouldn't trust my, my judgment, believe me. Just walk by, please. (scanner heart monitor activates) It's not supposed to do that.
I wondered, will you be examining the miners on Rigel 12?
Yes, if they need it.
You haven't asked yet? Are they in good health and all?
What? Oh, yes, they're in excellent health, all three of them.
Oh. Three.
Are you wearing some unusual kind of perfume or something radioactive, my dear?
No. I'm just me.
I wonder what makes it do that.
Captain? I hope you don't mind.
As a matter of fact, Miss McHuron, I do.
I was trying to take a walk, and I just, I just had to run in someplace. You see, all your men were looking at me, following me with their eyes.
Yes. I'll have to talk to them about that. They, er, they don't do that ordinarily, Miss McHuron, but somehow, in your case, and the ladies with you, its, er
They're probably just lonely. I can understand loneliness.
Yes. Yes, er, now, Miss McHuron
I, I suppose you understand it even more, having to run a huge ship like this with so much responsibility every minute and having to be so careful with all your men looking up to you.
Well, it probably appears more difficult than it is.
Hmm! I read once that a commander has to act like a paragon of virtue. I never met a paragon.
Neither have I.
Well, of course not. No one is. But some people try to pretend. Do you, Captain?
Miss McHuron, I don't
Oh, no! Oh, I just can't do it. I don't care what Harry Mudd says. I do like you, but I just can't go through with it. I hate this whole thing!
Just three? You're sure?
Yes. The miners are healthy and fairly young.
Later, dear, later. Magda, did you get to your communications man?
The head miner is named Ben Childress. The others are Gossett and Benton.
And they've been there?
Almost three years now, alone!
Perfect. Perfect. Three of them and three lovely ladies has Harry Mudd. And lithium crystals, my dear, are worth three hundred times their weight in diamonds, thousands of times their weight in gold.
But they'll be down there, and we'll be up here, circling a hundred miles above them.
And there's a guard outside your door, Harry. You can't get out of your cabin.
No, my dears. After one more job for you, it won't be Harry Mudd that's trapped. It will be a gentleman named James T
I don't like you, and I'm not very happy with myself, either.
Well, I'm not really surprised. I've seen you noticing the Captain.
We're supposed to notice them! Oh, oh Harry, I don't feel very good. I think it must be near the time.
I asked for a preorbital course, Mister Farrell.
Preorbital course locked in, sir.
That's the last time I'm giving an order twice, gentlemen. We're down to battery power, and we're low on that.
It'll get us to Rigel 12, sir, but it'll be a shaky orbit.
Just hang us in long enough to get six crystals, Scotty. That's all we need.
I'll get you there.
Ridiculous. What are we running here. Did you examine them? Did you examine Eve?
She refused.
Well, come on, you're the doctor. What is it? Is it that we're tired, and they're beautiful? They are incredibly beautiful.
Are they, Jim? Are they actually more lovely, pound for pound, measurement for measurement, than any other women you've known? Or is it that they just, well, act beautiful. No. Strike that, strike that.
What are they?
You mean are they alien illusions? That sort of thing?
I asked you first.
No, an alien smart enough to pull this could also keep my medical scanner from going beep!
I don't follow you.
I don't either.
Top space frequency of three nine. (hands over communicator)
Rigel 12. Rigel 12.
This is Rigel 12. Come in, Enterprise.
Well, this isn't exactly the Enterprise. My name is Harry Mudd. To whom have I the pleasure of speaking, sir?
Power curve still dropping, Captain.
We'll make orbit, sir. A temporary one.
Lay in. Computer?
We can sustain this orbit for three days, seven hours.
More than enough time. Communications, have a representative of the Rigel 12 miners meet us here to discuss our needs. Beam him up first pass over their camp.
Yes, sir.
Look what's happening. (hair lank, skin slightly lined) Look at my face.
Give us the pills.
What if someone sees us like this?
You'll never find them, Harry, and if you do find them you know what they are. A cheat. If you care for someone, really care
(ransacking drawers frantically) For whom, Evie? For Kirk? You'll find out that Ship's captains are already married, girl, to their vessels. You'd find out the first time you came between him and the ship. You'll see.
I'm going back to what I was. Ugly.
I can't stand myself like this.
Why did you hide them, Harry? Don't you trust us?
I didn't hide them, girl. I put them in a safe place in case I was searched.
Mattress! Yes, here! (Ruth and Magda devour them eagerly) Go on, Eve. Take it. It's not a cheat. It's a miracle for some man who can appreciate it and who needs it.
Even burned and cracked, they're beautiful. Destroying them was a shame. 
Not at all, Mister Spock. The choice was burning this lithium crystal or the destruction of another man's ship. Come.
Sir. Mining Chief Childress and Mister Gossett.
Good. Show them in. I'm James Kirk, captain of the Enterprise. This is my science officer Mister Spock.
Let's get right to business. You want lithium crystals and we've got them.
Fine. I'm authorised to pay an equitable price.
We're not sure they're for sale, Captain. We might prefer a swap.
What did you have in mind?
Mudd's women.
If we like them. We'd like to have a look at them first of course.
Right. Trot them out, Captain. Oh, and Harry Mudd. Either way, I've agreed to have him released. Charges dropped.
(laughs) Is there anything else?
You've got no choice, Kirk. You beam a landing party down, and you won't find one blessed crystal.
No deal. You're a long way out in space, gentlemen. You'll need medical help, cargo runs, starship protection. You want to consider those facts too?
Come along, ladies, come along. You must be Ben Childress. Come on now, girls, come on.
And you must be Herm Gossett.
Yes, I reckon I am.
One thing I'll say for you, Mudd, you're not a liar. Ladies, you are welcome.
It's still no deal.
Conserving batteries, sir. Half power.
I'm told they have only three days of orbit left before they start spiraling in. I do hate to see you suffering such a situation, Captain, but truth is truth, and the sad fact is you will deal. Sooner or later, you'll have to.
All right, Childress, you've won. Now I'll take the lithium crystals.
When I have the time, Kirk.
Childress.
We're busy, Mister Kirk.
We don't have the time to spare, Captain.
You got a better idea?
(to Eve) Blows like that all the time. You can get lost a dozen feet from your doorstep. The wind comes up sudden. Magnetic storm. That means the wind will really rip soon.
Dance with me.
Would you like to dance?
No, I (coughs) No. I'm sorry, I guess it must be the dust.
That's the way it is on Rigel all the time. (cuts in on Ruth instead)
Hey.
I'm cutting in.
What's the matter with you?
Why don't you run a raffle and the loser gets me? (leaves)
You can't go out there. You'll get killed.
Just have those crystals here when I get back.
Eve! Eve!
Traverse parallel three and four.
Checking, but not getting much.
The storm is ionising the atmosphere, Captain. Getting difficult to probe through it.
Captain, this is draining our batteries further. If we only had those crystals.
But we don't! I didn't get any. I should have found a way. Satisfied, Mister Scott?
Losing communications with the miners, sir. Magnetic storm seems worse.
Has Childress reported in yet?
No, sir. He and the girl are still missing.
Sorry, Scotty. How much power do we have left?
About five hours, sir.
Infrared reading. Check traverse three, grid zero four zero.
About eleven miles, bearing one two one from the mining company.
That's Ben Childress' quarters.
There's a heat unit operating in there. It could be a cookstove.
Have Mudd meet me in the transporter room.
Mudd?
The name of this game.
I had things where I wanted them.
I ate some of your food, so I paid with some chores.
And I do my own cooking. I've not laid a hand on you. Remember that.
Oh, the sound of male ego. You travel halfway across the galaxy, and it's still the same song. There. You going to eat or talk?
I guess I'm supposed to sit, taste, and roll my eyes. Ooh, female cooking again. I've tasted better, by my own hand.
Well you're tasting some of it now. I couldn't scrape three layers of your leavings out of that pan.
You find me a well, some decent water, then talk.
Well, why don't you hang your pan out in the wind and let the sand blast it clean, or hadn't you thought about that?
(after hanging out the pots) It might work. That solitaire?
Double jack.
The red eight ought to go on the black nine.
Not in double jack.
You're not only plain as an old bucket, you're not even good company. What the devil happened to your looks, anyway?
I got tired of you. I slumped.
You heard what I said. You're homely! I've got enough in crystals already to buy queens by the gross! (Kirk and Mudd enter) I didn't touch her.
Thank heaven you found her.
She's been bubbling with gratitude ever since.
Sit down. Tell him. Tell him, Harry.
Ah. Yes, well.
The Venus drugs, Harry.
Venus drug? I've heard of it but, it's not just one of those stories?
Oh, it exists, illegally.
Well, actually, you see, it's a relatively harmless drug.
Harmless!
Well, what it does is give you more of whatever you have. Well, with men, it makes them more muscular. Women, rounder. Men, more aggressive. Women, more feminine, and
He gave it to the women before you met them.
Does that mean the others? They really look like she does?
Mister Childress, I
Is that what it means?
Yes, that's what it means!
What happened to my partners?
They've left for their quarters during the storm, Childress. They're married. Subspace radio marriage. It was a fraud. They can get out of it.
If they want to.
Why?
You can't condemn the women.
I can! A man goes out and fights, almost dies. We all almost die. We should have, but we didn't. And now that we've got the good life in our hands, you bring us women for wives that
You don't want wives, you want this. This is what you want, Mister Childress. I hope you remember it and dream about it, because you can't have it. It's not real! (takes the pills) Is this the kind of wife you want, Ben? Not someone to help you, not a wife to cook and sew and cry and need, but this kind. Selfish, vain, useless. Is this what you really want? All right, then. Here it is.
Quite a woman, eh, Childress?
A fake, pumped up by a drug.
By herself. She took no drug.
I swallowed it.
Coloured gelatin.
Yes, they took away my drug and substituted that.
But that can't be.
There's only one kind of woman.
Or man, for that matter.
You either believe in yourself, or you don't. All right Childress, I've gone as far with you as I intend to. I want those lithium crystals and I want them now. Enterprise, this is Kirk.
Spock here, Captain.
Stand by. Do I beam down a search party?
No, the crystals are here, and you're welcome to them.
Stand by, Mister Spock. We're coming aboard with the lithium crystals.
How many coming, Captain?
Eve will stay, today at least. We, er, we want to talk.
Eve?
You've got someone up there called the Enterprise.
Two of us, Mister Spock. Come on, Mister Mudd.
Don't you think you could possibly, by accident, arrange to leave me behind here? On this planet that would be punishment enough.
I can't do that, Harry, but I will appear as a character witness at your trial. If you think that'll help.
They'll throw away the key.
That must have been quite a talk you made down there. Ever try considering the patent medicine business?
Why should I work your side of the street?
I'm happy the affair is over. A most annoying emotional episode.
Smack right in the old heart. Oh, I'm sorry. In your case, it would be about here.
The fact that my internal arrangement differs from yours, Doctor, pleases me no end.
Course plotted and all systems in operation.
Engines engaged. Helm answering.
Out of orbit, sir.
Ahead full.
Ahead full, sir.
What Are Little Girls Made Of?
All sections, security check in progress. Report. Forward phaser
We're entering standard orbit, Nurse. It won't be much longer.
Forward scanner to Bridge.
I understand you gave up a career in bio-research to sign aboard a starship.
I know he's alive down there, Captain.
It's been five years since his last message.
Roger's a very determined man. He'd find a way to live.
Beginning signals to surface, sir.
Put it on all frequencies, Lieutenant.
Ship's record banks show little we don't already know about this planet, Captain. Gravity is one point one of Earth, atmosphere within safety limits.
But the surface temperature of that planet is one hundred degrees below zero.
It may have been inhabited once, but the sun in this system has been fading steadily for a half million years. Now, Doctor Korby, often called the Pasteur of archaeological medicine. His translation of medical records from the Orion ruins revolutionised our immunisation techniques.
Required reading at the academy, Mister Spock. I've always wanted to meet him. Do you think there's any chance of him still being alive?
I've tried all frequencies, sir. No return signal.
Keep trying.
Warp capacity point zero seven and building.
His last signal told about finding underground caverns.
And since then two expeditions have failed to find him.
I've run all frequencies a second time. There's no
Enterprise, come in, Enterprise. This is Roger Korby. Repeating, this is Doctor Roger Korby. Do you read me, Enterprise? This is Doctor Roger Korby standing by.
Enterprise to Korby. We have your co-ordinates pin-pointed. We're preparing to beam down a party. It may interest you that we have aboard this vessel
I've a rather unusual request, Captain Kirk. Beam down alone, just yourself. We've made discoveries of such a nature they may require an extraordinary decision from you.
That's an unusual request.
The man making it is Doctor Roger Korby.
You're certain you recognise his voice?
Have you ever been engaged, Mister Spock? Yes, it's Roger.
Agreed, Doctor. However, there will be two of us.
Hello, Roger.
Christine!
Yes, Roger.
Darling, how, Where are you? Yes, yes, by all means, Captain. I, I had no idea, no hope. Darling, are you all right?
Yes, Roger. Everything's all right now.
We're on our way, Doctor. We'll be with you in a moment. Enterprise out.
Energise.
He said he'd be waiting.
Doctor Korby? Doctor Korby. It's possible we may have hit the wrong entry point. Kirk to Enterprise.
Spock here, Captain.
Beam down two security men.
Any problems, Captain?
Some delay in meeting us. Probably nothing at all. Kirk out. Corridors could be quite deep. Getting here may have taken more time than he estimated. Don't worry.
Thank you.
Rayburn, maintain post here.
Yes, sir.
Matthews, we'll look for Doctor Korby. Accompany us.
Is that you, Doctor Korby?
Doctor Brown! It's Roger's assistant. Brownie, where's Roger?
Be careful.
Is there a path down there?
There's no hope, Captain. It's bottomless. He must have slipped.
Any chance of a projection or a ledge?
None, Captain. Unfortunate. Terribly unfortunate. Doctor Korby was detained. I came as soon as I could.
Not soon enough.
Brownie, what is it?
Explain.
Don't you recognise me?
Christine. You look well. My name is Brown, Doctor Korby's assistant. I presume you are Captain Kirk. He's dead, I assure you. Come, Doctor Korby will be waiting.
You do know him well? An old friend?
I suppose living here for five years.
Captain Kirk to Rayburn. Report.
All quiet here at the entry, Captain.
Any problems there, sir?
We lost Matthews. Apparently an accident. Tell the Enterprise to have a full security party standing by.
Yes, sir.
And we'll both report in at hourly intervals. If you and I lose contact, or if he fails to hear from either of us, he's to beam the security party down immediately. Kirk out.
Doctor Korby has discovered that as their sun dimmed, the inhabitants of this planet moved underground from an open environment to this dark world. When you were a student of his, Christine, you must have often heard Doctor Korby remark how freedom of movement and choice produced the human spirit. The culture of Exo 3 proved his theory. When they moved from light to darkness, they replaced freedom with a mechanistic culture. Doctor Korby has been able to uncover elements of this culture which will revolutionise the universe when freed from this cavernous environment.
I'm Andrea. You must be Christine. I've always thought how beautiful your name is. And you must be Captain Kirk of the Starship Enterprise. We appreciate you bringing Roger's fiancee to him.
I don't remember Doctor Korby mentioning an Andrea.
But you are exactly as Roger described you. No wonder he missed you so.
Where is Doctor Korby?
Here, Captain. I, I've been looking forward to (sees Chapel, and they kiss)
Oh, I knew I'd find you.
Everything's all right now. Oh, forgive me, Captain. I'm, er, I'm Roger Korby.
There's no need to apologise, sir, and certainly no need to introduce yourself.
The captain lost a man in the caverns, Doctor.
What? How did it happen?
The pit near the outer junction. The edge must have given way.
I'm terribly sorry, Captain. Perhaps if I'd been there. I know the passages so well.
It wasn't your fault. Kirk to Rayburn, report. I'm required to make a security confirmation. When I call my ship, if you list your personnel, cargo requirements, any special needs
Captain, I'd much prefer
Rayburn, are you receiving?
I'd prefer you waited, Captain, please, till I've talked to you.
I've lost contact with my guard. I'm required to call my ship.
No communications, Captain. (holding weapon)
Roger.
I'm sorry. If they should send down more people,
Roger, that
He won't be harmed. I promise you. Isn't it possible there could be things here unknown to you, so terribly important
Sir, one man is dead. I've lost contact with the other.
Andrea.
What are you doing?
This is necessary, Captain. You will understand. Andrea. (she reaches for Kirk's phaser, but he grabs her to use as a shield and aims it at Brown instead, while moving towards a table to use as a barrier instead of the girl)
Drop it! (he fires, Brown falls straight backwards and the big figure bursts in and lifts Kirk off his feet. Chapel screams as she sees the hole in Brown reveals electronic parts)
Enterprise from Captain Kirk. Come in. Do you read?
Frequency open, Mister Spock.
Spock here, Captain.
Contact established with Doctor Korby.
We were becoming concerned, Captain. Your check-in was overdue and since we'd not heard from your security team
No problem, Mister Spock. Bear with me.
We'll return to the ship within forty eight hours. Doctor Korby's records and specimens will require careful packing.
Captain, are you all right? You sound tired.
If you move or cry out, Ruk may injure you. At least wait until we can talk.
Acknowledge, Captain. Is everything all right?
Fine, Mister Spock. Doctor Korby has made some fascinating discoveries. All under control. Stand by for regular contact. Kirk out.
This is not a vain display, Captain. I'm a scientist. You obviously know my reputation. Trust me.
Yes, I know your reputation. The whole galaxy knows who you are and what you stand for. That's why all this makes no sense.
There's so much you must learn Before you make a final judgment. For example (to Ruk) Andrea.
You must be Captain Kirk of the Starship Enterprise. Christine, it's all right now.
You see, Captain?
Yes Roger, everything is all right now.
That's enough. You are not to mock Christine. You will never harm her.
Or disobey an order from her.
You will not disobey her orders. Satisfied, Captain Kirk? Both love and trust. Now, give me twenty four hours to convince you.
Doctor, do I need to be a prisoner to be convinced?
What would your first duty be upon return to your vessel? Report! Do you realise the number of discoveries lost because of superstition, of ignorance, of a layman's inability to comprehend?
A simple layman's question, Doctor. Where is my other crewman? Alive? Dead?
Ruk was programmed to protect my experiments. The logic of his machine mind saw danger to me.
Where is my other crewman?
Ruk destroyed them both, totally against my wishes I assure you.
He's an android like Brown?
More complex than Brown. Much superior. I was left here by the old ones.
Ruk was still tending the machinery when we arrived here. How many centuries? Even Ruk doesn't know. With his help, ith the records I could find, we built Brown.
You've convinced me, Doctor. You've convinced me that you're dangerous. (makes a run for it but Ruk grabs him and throws him around)
Ruk, no!
I do not understand. Why are you unhappy? You are with Roger again.
Where is Captain Kirk?
You are concerned about the captain?
Yes, I am concerned.
How can you love Roger without trusting him? Why does it bother you when I use the name Roger?
Andrea, it's sufficient that it does disturb her. You will call me Doctor Korby from now on, Andrea.
Yes, Doctor Korby. I didn't mean to eavesdrop, darling. As you can see, Captain Kirk is fine. He won't be harmed. The things at stake here simply make it necessary he doesn't send a report to his ship. I need time to explain and demonstrate to him and to you. Now shall we start with Andrea?
Yes, let's start with Andrea.
I'm like Doctor Brown, an android. Didn't you know?
Remarkable, isn't she? Notice the the lifelike pigmentation, the variation in skin tones. The flesh, the flesh has warmth. There's even a pulse, physical sensation.
How convenient.
Christine, you must realise an android's like a computer. It does only what I programme. As a trained scientist yourself, you must realise that
Given a mechanical Doctor Brown, a mechanical geisha would be no more difficult.
You think I could love a machine?
Did you?
Andrea's incapable of that. She simply obeys orders. She has no meaning for me. There's no emotional bond. Andrea, kiss Captain Kirk. Now strike him. You see? There's no emotion in it, no emotional involvement. She simply responds to orders. She's a totally logical computer. A thing is not a woman. Now do you understand?
If these mechanical things have no feelings and perform only as you programme them, then why did Brown try to shoot me? Why did he kill two of my men? There are many things I don't understand, Doctor.
I will answer all of your questions now.
This is how you make an android. (Kirk is naked on one side of circular table, a human-shaped blob on the other) Andrea. (the table starts turning) He's not being harmed, I promise.
Roger, what's happened to you? When I sat in your class, you wouldn't even dream of harming an insect or an animal. Their life was sacred to you then.
Christine, if I'd simply beamed up to their vessel with Brown and the others, I'd have given them objects of curiosity, beginnings of wild stories, foolish theories. Ruk! Watch carefully. (the blob turns into Kirk, and the table is stopped) Choose, Christine. Which is your captain?
I don't know. They're exact. I honestly don't know.
Synthetic organs are in place. We merely synchronise them with Kirk's autonomic nervous system, duplicating the rhythms of his body. At the same time, we duplicate the mental pattern. Now, physical pattern complete, we now make a mental pattern. Ready for final synaptic fusion. Andrea, stand by for cortex circuits. The android will be so perfect It could even replace the captain. The same memories, the same attitudes, the same abilities. Activate circuits.
Mind your own business, Mister Spock. I'm sick of your half-breed interference, do you hear? Mind your own business, Mister Spock. I'm sick of your half-breed (passes out, the other one wakes up)
Complete.
Are you all right?
As far as I know.
Now, meet an android.
I am now programmed to please you also. Is the food appealing?
Yes, thank you.
Please sit, Captain.
Doctor Korby suggested that you have lunch. He thought you might have a few things to talk about.
Captain.
No, I'm not torn. I'm puzzled. I'm worried.
Nothing he hasn't told you. I know it doesn't make sense. What he's done may seem wrong, but he is Roger Korby, whatever he seems to be doing.
No. You're forgetting how well I know him. He's as sane as you or I.
Please, don't ask me to make that choice. I'd much rather you push me off the same precipice where Matthews died. Oh, I can't. (pushes plate away) Please, go ahead and eat.
He even has your sense of humour.
Well, there's one difference between us. I'm hungry.
One at a time, gentlemen. Captain?
Eating is a pleasure, sir. Unfortunately, one you will never know.
He's an exact duplicate?
In every detail.
What about memory? Tell me about Sam.
He saw me off on this mission.
He said he was being transferred to Earth colony two research station.
You might as well try to outthink a calculating machine.
Obviously, I can't, but we do have some interesting differences.
Totally unimportant ones. You may leave now. (Kirk2 leaves) You haven't guessed the rest? Not even you, Christine? What you saw was only a machine, Only half of what I could've accomplished, Do you understand? By continuing the process I could've transferred you, your very consciousness into that android. Your soul, if you wish. All of you. In android form, a human being can have practical immortality. Can you understand what I'm offering mankind?
Programming. Different word, but the same old promises made by Genghis Khan, Julius Caesar, Hitler, Ferris, Maltuvis.
Can you understand that a human converted to an android can be programmed for the better? Can you imagine how life could be improved if we could do away with jealousy, greed, hate?
It can also be improved by eliminating love, tenderness, sentiment. The other side of the coin, Doctor.
No one need ever die again. No disease, no deformities. why even fear can be programmed away, replaced with joy. I'm offering you a pracical heaven, a new paradise, and all I need is your help.
All you wanted before was my understanding.
I need transportation to a planet colony with proper raw materials. I'm sure there are several good possibilities among your next stops. No diversion from your route. I want no suspicions aroused. I'll begin producing androids carefully, selectively.
Yes, yes. No one need know, only to frighten uninformed minds.
They must be strongly infiltrated into society before the android existence is revealed. I want no wave of hysteria to destroy what is good and right. You with me, Captain?
You've created your own Kirk. Why do you need me?
I created him to impress you, not to replace you.
I'm impressed, Doctor, but not the way you think! (leaps up with cord he's untied from the chair leg and loops it around Korby's throat) Stand back, Ruk! I'll kill him! Stay back. (goes through door, releasing Korby into Ruk's arms)
Ruk, protect!
Roger, I. Ruk, no! (runs after him)
Ruk, stop! Doctor Korby said you are to obey me! Ruk! Ruk! Ruk, I order you not to harm him!
Captain Kirk, where are you? Captain Kirk! I can help you!
Christine, is that you?
Captain!
Captain, We finished ahead of schedule.
You're going back down with the command pack?
Yes. very well, Captain.
No problems here, sir.
Security, Spock here. Status of your landing party?
Ready and standing by, sir,
Have them meet me in the transporter room after the Captain has beamed down.
A small colony. Abundant raw materials. You made a good beginning, Captain.
Andrea, kiss me. (she does, then raises her arm to slap him. He stops her and pulls her in for a passionate embrace)
No. Not programmed for you.
What's the matter, Andrea? Confused?
No. (leaves. Ruk blocks Kirk's attempt to leave)
Emotion, Ruk? You disapprove of Miss Chapel's orders to save my life?
To maintain your existence would be illogical.
Why? Can't your memory banks solve a simple equation like that? What happened to the old ones, Ruk?
So long ago.
Is it possible they built their machines too well, gave them pride and a desire to survive? Machines that wanted logic and order and found that frustrated by the illogical emotional creatures that built them?
Yes, the old ones. The ones who made us. They grew fearful of us. They began to turn us off.
And isn't it Korby who's creating the same danger to you all over again? Unlike you, we humans are full of unpredictable emotions that logic cannot solve.
Yes. Yes, it had been so long ago, I had forgotten. The old ones here. The ones who made us, yes. Yes, it is still in my memory banks. It became necessary to destroy them. You are inconsistent. You cannot be programmed. You are inferior.
And Korby?
You came from the outside. You bring disorder here.
The danger to you is Korby.
I was programmed by Korby. I cannot harm him.
The old ones programmed you, too, but it became possible to destroy them.
That was the equation! (seizes Kirk) Existence! Survival must cancel out programming.
That's it, Ruk! Logic! You can't protect someone who's trying to destroy you!
Ruk, I would like
You brought him among us. You brought the inferior ones. We had cleansed ourselves of them. Now you bring the evil back!
Ruk, stop! Your programming. (fires phaser, Ruk vanishes) I had no choice.
You were a man with respect for all things alive. How can I explain the change in you? If I was to tell Earth I was in your hands, to tell them what has become (jumps Korby and traps his arm in a door. The skin tears to reveal electronics)
It's still me, Christine. Roger. I'm in here. You can't imagine how it was. I was frozen, dying. My legs were gone. I was, I had only my brain between life and death. This can be repaired easier than another man can set a broken finger. I'm still the same as I was before, Christine, perhaps even better.
Are you, Roger?
(into comm. unit) Andrea.
Yes, Doctor.
There's someone in the outer junction.
Spock. He must've got my message.
I will find Ruk.
But he'll never find us in this maze.
Ruk has been shut off.
Get a weapon. Deal with it. Protect.
I will kiss you.
You, you will not?
I'm the same! A direct transfer. All of me, human, rational, and without a flaw.
He freed himself, and I destroyed, (sees Kirk there) destroyed him. I am not programmed for alarms. I listened to your instructions. They were mis-stated.
She killed the android, Korby, the same way you killed Ruk. Is this your perfect world, your flawless beings killing off one another? Aren't you doing exactly what you hate most in humans, killing with no more concern than when you turn off a light?
I'm not a computer. Test me. Ask me to solve any, equate, transmit. Christine, Christine, let me prove myself. Does this make such a difference?
Don't you see, Roger? Everything you've done has proved it isn't you.
I am Roger Korby!
Then prove it. Give me that phaser gun. If there's any human left in you, give it to me.
No. You will never understand. I constructed a perfect being, tested it, proved it. Proved it. Proved it? (hands phaser to Kirk)
Andrea, give me the weapon.
No. Protect. Protect. (to Korby) To love you. To, to kiss you.
No. You cannot love. You're not human.
Love you. Kiss. (Korby reaches for trigger and disintegrates them both)
Captain Kirk!
In here, Spock.
Captain, are you all right? Nurse? Where's Doctor Korby?
Doctor Korby was never here.
Thank you for letting me make the decision, Captain. I'm quite certain I'm doing the right thing. (leaves)
She's staying with the ship. Something bothering you, Mister Spock?
Frankly, I was rather dismayed by your use of the term half-breed, Captain. You must admit it is an unsophisticated expression.
I'll remember that Mister Spock, the next time I find myself in a similar situation. Steady as we go, helm.
Miri
Earth-style distress signal. SOS.
I've answered it on all frequencies, sir. They don't reply.
Not a vessel, a ground source. The third planet in this solar system, according to my instruments.
Directly ahead. Definitely an Earth-style signal.
We're hundreds of light years from Earth, Mister Spock. No colonies or vessels out this far.
Measuring the planet now, Captain. It's spheroid-shaped, circumference twenty four thousand eight hundred seventy four miles. Mass six times ten to the twenty first power tons. Mean density five point five one seven. Atmosphere oxygen, nitrogen.
Earth!
Not the Earth, another Earth. Another Earth?
Hold us in a fixed orbit, Mister Spock.
Affirmative, Captain.
Still no response, communications?
None, Captain.
We'll beam down. Alert security. Prepare to transport landing party to surface. We'll land in the vicinity of the distress signals now being received.
Identical. Earth, as it was in the early 1900s.
More the, er, mid-1900s I would say, Captain, approximately 1960.
But where is everybody?
Readings indicate that natural deterioration has been taking place on this planet for at least several centuries.
You mean there's no one alive?
Not conclusive, Yeoman. The evidence would suggest that the distress signal is automated.
Now, this is marvellous. the most horrible conglomeration of antique architecture I've ever seen.
Mister Spock. (comes upon child's tricycle)
Of course somebody will fix it.
Definitely humanoid, in spite of the distortion.
But with the mind of a child. Bones, what is it?
A seizure of some type.
We want to help you.
It's dead. It's incredible.
What is?
Its metabolic rate. It's impossibly high as if it's burning itself up, almost as if it aged a century in just the past few minutes.
(sound of running) Come on!
How old is this thing?
About three hundred years.
(sound in the closet) Come out. We mean you no harm. (opens door)
Don't hurt me, please.
I'm not going to hurt you.
No, please, don't. I didn't do anything.
I won't hurt you.
No, please don't.
I only want to talk to you.
No, don't. Don't hurt.
Come on.
Don't, please.
I won't hurt you.
Don't hurt me.
Come on. It's all right. Come on.
We won't hurt you, sweetheart. We're your friends. No, shh!
Take the guards, have a look outside. Radioactive readings, chemical pollutions, any further sign of life.
Right, Captain.
I wonder what happened to her, that she should be so terrified of us.
But I remember the things you Grups did, burning, yelling, hurting people.
We didn't do anything like that.
You're not going to hurt?
Well, of course not. We're here to help.
Grups don't help.
But we will.
What happened here? Where is everybody?
You know.
No, I don't. Won't you tell me?
You got a foolie, is that it, and you want me to play, but I can't. I don't know the rules. I've got to know the rules.
Foolie?
A game, you know. You can't play a game without rules. Even Grups ought to know that.
What are Grups?
You are. They will, when Onlies get old.
Grownups.
You said something about the Grups doing bad things, yelling, hurting, burning.
That was when they started to get sick in the before time. We hid, then they were gone. Am I doing all right?
You're doing fine.
You said the Grups got sick. Is that why there aren't any of them around?
Yes. They died, but that was after the awful things.
A plague, Captain. That could explain a lot of it.
But what about the children, the Onlies? Didn't the awful things affect them?
Of course not. We're here, aren't we?
More of you? How many?
All there are.
What's your name?
Miri.
Miri. A pretty name for a pretty young woman.
Pretty?
Very pretty.
Guards! Cover me.
Nyah na nyah. (stones are dropped from above) Nyah na nyah. Nyah na nyah. Nyah na nyah. Nyah na nyah. Nyah na nyah. Nyah na nyah. Nyah na nyah. Nyah na nyah. Nyah na nyah!
Children, Captain. Lots of them. We couldn't begin to get close to them. They just seemed to scurry away, like animals. Only children.
Miri said all the adults died.
That creature which attacked us was certainly no child. Perhaps it died of the disease the girl's talking about.
There must be records somewhere and answers to some of our questions. Miri, do you know any buildings where the doctors used to work?
Yes, I know that. Them and their pills and things.
Will you take me there?
That's a bad place.
It's important. Please.
All right. Do you have a name, too?
Yes. It's Jim.
I like that name.
Good. I like yours, too. I like you.
Do you really?
I wouldn't lie to you.
I wouldn't lie to you, either, Jim. I remember the Grups, but you're nice. You're different.
Why, thank you. (sees a mark on his hand)
It's already starting. I knew it would. Just like it did with the Grups. It'll spread all over you, and you'll yell, and you'll try to hurt everybody and then you'll die. I knew it would! I knew it would!
A veritable zoo of bacteria. Beam down a biocomputer and a portable electronic microscope. If I'm dealing with viruses, I'll need better equipment than I have here.
Yes, Doctor.
Captain Kirk?
Yes, Lieutenant?
I've got volunteers standing by ready to help you, sir.
Under no circumstances do I want anyone to beam down from the ship. We can't take any chances with further contamination.
But Captain, if you become too ill to
My orders still stand, Lieutenant. You can help us best by clearing the computer banks and standing by. Kirk out. Bones, why do you think the symptoms haven't appeared in Mister Spock?
I don't know. Probably the little bugs or whatever they are have no appetite for green blood.
Being a red-blooded human obviously has its disadvantages. Now there you have a museum piece, Doctor. (referring to microscope) Lens type, manually operated, light-activated.
Spare me the analysis, Mister Spock, please. It is enough that it works.
It spreads real fast. I know. When you're old, it covers you like anything.
(reading) Intermediate experimentation report project on life prolongation.
Progress report, genetics section, Life Prolongation Project.
So that's what it was.
Life prolongation. Didn't have much luck, did they?
Tubular with extreme multiplicability. Appear to have affinity for nucleic acids. Give me what you have.
This was three hundred years ago, Captain.
All the adults are dead. Only the children are left alive.
But children become adults.
At least they have up to now.
Doctor, there are certain glandular changes which take place upon entering puberty, are there not?
Of course. It changes the entire body system. You know that. Of course you know that. Why?
Is it not possible that these children here, as they enter puberty, contract the disease?
That would explain why there are no adults.
Glandular, post-pubescent. Could be.
It's illogical. It does not follow. All the adults on this planet died three hundred years ago, but there are children in the streets.
Who die when they enter adolescence.
But how do they keep the line going?
One thing, Captain. If she were a wild animal ever since she's been a little girl, how do you explain that she wants to stay with us?
Loneliness? I don't know, curiosity? I think children have an instinctive need for adults. They want to be told right and wrong.
There may be other emotions at work in this case, Captain.
She likes you, Jim.
She's becoming a woman.
Mister Spock.
Spock here.
Here are those figures you asked for. Twelve to the tenth power. Metabolic rate seventy two percent. Production of nucleic acids reduced to thirty three percent of normal. Conventional chronological progression one hundred by three point six.
Acknowledged, Lieutenant. I have their calculations now.
(to redshirts) Try again. See if you can find anything outside. (to Miri) Hey, clean up that desk for me, will you?
All right, Jim.
Thank you.
According to their life prolongation plan, what they thought they were accomplishing, a person would age only one month for every one hundred years of real time.
One hundred years and only one month?
Exactly, Yeoman. Evidently through some miscalculation, this virus annihilated the entire adult population in a very short period, leaving only the children.
But that means these children
Could very well be immensely old.
That would certainly answer the question of what happened to their parents.
Answers it very well.
Children who never age. Eternal childhood, filled with play, no responsibilities. It's almost like a dream.
I wouldn't examine that dream too closely, Yeoman. It might not turn out to be very pretty.
A few days ago or a week ago that creature that attacked us could have been just like Miri. A child entering puberty on this planet means a death sentence.
Do you suppose she knows?
I don't think so.
If they're as old as Spock claims, they must have some idea of what's happening.
There's no adult interpretation. I think we're dealing with children. Immensely old perhaps, but nonetheless children. We've got to do something about the others.
Difficult, if we can't even get a glimpse of them.
You couldn't get close to the other kids?
Impossible. They know the area too well, like mice.
I'm going to try. Miri? Come here. You want to go someplace with me?
Sure. (leave, holding hands)
That little girl
Is at least three hundred years older than you are, Yeoman. Think about it.
Miri is with them! Why? Why? 
I don't, I don't know. I know what we've got to do. There are more of them than we see. Somewhere, up in the sky, maybe, somewhere. They talk to each other all the time. You know Grups. You know what they do, the hurting, the killing.
That's right, the way it was in the before time. They talk to the other Grups with these little boxes. Now, if they didn't have those little boxes, they'd be all alone, huh?
Olly olly oxen free! Olly olly oxen free! Olly olly oxen free!
No! It's not a game, it's real. They're dangerous, they're Grups. Don't you understand?
(sees Kirk and Miri approach the building) All right, let's hide!
Dead. I don't understand it. My phaser wasn't set to kill.
Her name was Louise. She was just a little bit older than I am when it happened. Oh, Jim. (she hugs him)
Data has been fed into the computers, Mister Spock. Stand by.
Acknowledged.
(sharpening pencils) Are these enough, Jim?
We could use some more, if you don't mind.
No, I don't mind.
There couldn't be any doubt about what you found here?
This fellow made these notes in the last weeks after the disaster began. I disregard these last entries. He said himself he was too sick, too far gone to be sure he wasn't already mad, and I agree, but based on the entries he made before that, I know how much time we have. The ship's computers will verify my figures.
Only a matter of time before we all go mad, destroy each other, till the last of us finally destroys himself.
What about Miri?
Our guess was correct. They contract the disease as they enter puberty and their metabolism changes. The notes would indicate it doesn't become acute for a month or so. I estimate she has perhaps five or six weeks left.
What about us?
The older the victim, the more rapid the progress of the disease.
And you? The disease doesn't seem to be interested in you.
I am a carrier. Whatever happens, I can't go back to the ship, and I do want to go back to the ship, Captain.
Of course, Mister Spock. We still don't know what we're fighting.
No, but we know what it is and how fast it does it. It's progressing. We'll begin to feel it inside soon. Intense fever, great pain in the extremities, fuzziness of vision. Of course, those are the early symptoms. There'll be more.
Are You certain about the time we have left?
I presume my calculations are correct.
Is there any possibility
Landing party, this is the Enterprise.
Spock here.
Computer indicates one hundred seventy hours, Mister Spock.
Verified, Captain. We have seven days.
There's no data, no starting point.
I think I've found it.
Janice, take Miri for a walk.
Yes, sir.
Only one half intact.
But do you know what they were up to?
More or less. The idea was to create a new series of diseases, a chain reaction of viruses meant essentially to extend the life of the human cell immeasurably.
Unfortunately, they weren't successful. We've seen the results.
You two will have to recreate their thinking. If you can isolate that virus, we'll be able to develop a vaccine.
Is that all, Captain? We have five days, you know.
I know.
Nyah na nyah. Nyah na nyah.
The children! (all dash out, while Jahn sneaks in and collects the communicators from the desks)
Anything?
No, nothing.
And you? (clunk as grate closes)
Communicators, Captain, they're gone.
Jim, We've absolutely got to have those communicators. Without them, we don't have the computers, and without the computers, we don't have a chance.
Haven't you found a thing yet?
Would you like to take a crack at it?
(as Kirk pushes past and makes her drop flasks) No! No! No! (runs out, Kirk follows, then Miri)
I'm upset, so upset. Back on the ship, I used to try to get you to look at my legs. Captain, look at my legs. (covered in blotches)
(holds her) We're all frightened. (Miri leaves)
Jim, I found something!
The last slide I examined, I failed to make the necessary adjustment. The slowing down of my own responses
Never mind that, what did you find?
The disease, Captain, the one they created three hundred years ago.
There's a chance!
A chance. At least it's a race now, and we've just wasted a minute.
That would be some foolie, Miri, but do you think it would work?
I know. I know. Don't you think I've heard them talk? They have such little time to do this dumb thing of theirs, this baninski thing. If we get her away. that Yeoman, that's one person less to start off with.
It's easy. She's always asking me about the youngest little Onlies, little ones. What if they get sick, who takes care of them? Do they have enough to eat? Where do they sleep? I'll just tell her one of you fell down and got hurt.
All right, you.
But Grups, they know things and all that. You know, I bet they'll be able to do it with one person less.
Not one, two. Because he'll try to find her.
The Captain. He'll try to find her, but he won't. Mister Lovey-dovey.
Bonk bonk! Bonk bonk!
It looks right.
The nitrogen cycle, it has to be.
But the question is, what's the dosage?
That is a very good question.
Where is she, Miri? Where is she, Miri? Where's Janice?
What's the matter with you? How should I know?
Where is she? Has something happened to her?
Don't you feel all right?
No, I don't feel all right! None of us feel all right! Can't you see what's going on?
Jim, I don't want anything to happen to you.
I've got to find Janice.
That's not all, Captain. We've got to find those communicators.
We're trying, Mister Spock. We're trying very hard.
That's not good enough! This could be it, but we can't test it without the ship's computers.
We've got to have those communicators, Jim.
This is the vaccine?
That's what the computers will tell us.
Without them, it could be a beaker full of death.
Did you hear them? We only have a few hours left.
I don't care.
You've got to care. Miri, I'm going to tell you something. You, your friends, all the Onlies are going to get the disease unless we succeed in what we're doing. You've seen your friends get it.
Sometimes it happens.
Not sometimes. All the times, Miri! As soon as you start growing up the way you are. Don't you know why you don't like to play games anymore, why you don't see your friends the way you used to? It's because you're becoming a young woman, and the moment you become a young woman, you get the disease. All of you.
That's not true. It just happens sometimes.
All the time, Miri! It's happening to you right now! Look at it. Look at it, Miri, it's in you!
No! No! No!
No, you got the wrong game. A teacher, I told you. Now, what does a teacher say, huh?
It's not funny.
It's a foolie.
What are you going to do with me?
You think I'd tell you? Miri, you're not supposed to be here.
I know.
What's the matter, something go wrong?
No.
Okay, then. Don't just stand there in the doorway, come on in.
Listen to him.
You listen, Miri.
I did. Why do you think I brought him here? Tell them, Jim.
Tell'em, Jim. Tell'em, Jim.
Tell'em, Jim! Tell'em, Jim! Tell'em, Jim! Tell'em, Jim!
Listen to me. Listen to me!
No yelling in the classroom! Look at him, a very bad citizen.
This isn't a game. It never was a game.
You're the teacher.
Blah blah blah! Blah blah blah! Blah blah blah! Blah blah blah!
Listen to me! You've got our communicators, the boxes we talk into. We need them to talk to the ship.
No blah blah blah! Because if we don't talk to the ship, if you don't help us, there won't be any games anymore. There won't be anything. Nothing, no Grups, no Onlies, nobody left forever and ever.
(sees boy with club coming up behind him) Captain.
Now listen to me. You've got to help us before it's too late. Let Janice go. Give me those communicators before it's too late.
(approaching menacingly) Nyah na nyah, nyah na nyah, nyah na nyah, nyah na nyah.
You've seen your friends change one by one as they grew up. Did you ever see one of them not change? One by one, they got the disease, and they became like, Iike those creatures you're afraid of, like Louise. One by one they changed and got the disease. The disease like I've got, like Miri has. You understand what I'm talking about. You're not babies. We can help you!
No, please. No! (the other children join in as the little blonde girl watches, smiling)
(bleeding) It's waiting for you. It may only be a matter of months.
Listen to him. He's telling the truth.
He's funny. He thinks he's funny.
Look at my arms! That's what's going to happen to you unless you let me help you.
And the little ones. What's going to happen to them after you've gone, after you've turned into creatures like Louise? Oh, they'll still be here, but not for long, because the food's all gone. You've eaten it. Maybe six months left, that's all, and then nothing left to eat, nobody left to take care of them. They'll die, too.
Look at my arm, Jahn. It's happening to me. He's telling the truth.
They're Grups!
Bonk bonk! Bonk bonk! Bonk bonk! Bonk bonk!
All right, you want a foolie? All right. I dare you, I double-dare you. Look at the blood on my face. Now look at your hands. Blood on your hands. Now who's doing the hurting? Not the Grups, it's you hurting, yelling, maybe killing, just like the Grups you remember and creatures you're afraid of. You're acting like them, and you're going to be just like them unless you let me help you. I'm a Grup, and I want to help you. I'm begging you, let me help you or there won't be anything left at all. Please.
We can't wait for those communicators any longer.
We must. The vaccine could be fatal.
The disease certainly is. How long do we have left? Hours, minutes? How much longer do you want to wait?
Bickering is pointless. I'll check on the Captain's progress.
Spock!
Is he dead, Mister Spock?
Not yet.
(with children and communicators) Three hours, eleven minutes left. Thank you, Lieutenant. Keep this channel open. Clear your computers. What happened to him?
He injected himself with the vaccine. He was unconscious when I found him.
Look at his face.
The blemishes are fading. They're fading. Who will understand the medical mind?
Is this supposed to be a good thing, Miri?
Of course it is.
They were just children. Simply to leave them there with a medical team
Just children, three hundred years old and more. I've already contacted Space Central. They'll send teachers, advisers.
And truant officers, I presume.
They'll be all right.
Miri. She really loved you, you know.
Yes. I never get involved with older women, Yeoman. Mister Spock?
Captain?
Full ahead. Warp factor one.
Warp factor one, Captain.
Dagger Of The Mind
Ready to beam down. Energise. Energise.
Having trouble, gentlemen?
I just don't understand the problem, sir.
You're beaming cargo down to a penal colony, Mister Berkeley.
Their security force field, sir.
U.S.S. Enterprise to Tantalus colony.
Rehab colony. Come in.
Request opening in your force field for beaming down of cargo.
Enterprise, affirmative. Our security cover is now open.
Energise. Any incoming cargo?
Just one item, sir. Some research material bound for the Central Bureau of Penology at Stockholm.
Tantalus cargo ready to beam up.
Oh, Mister Berkeley, you might refamiliarise yourself with the manual on penal colony procedures.
Immediately, sir.
I think you can take the time to lock this up first.
I'll get a vault assignment. (leaves. The box opens, a man climbs out and attacks the technician)
I would like to have met Doctor Adams. Have you ever been to a penal colony since they started following his theories?
A cage is a cage, Jim.
You're behind the times, Bones. They're more like resort colonies now.
Message, Captain. Switching to speaker.
Tantalus colony to Enterprise. We are unable to locate one of our inmates. This is a potentially violent case. Possibly hidden in the box we beamed up to you. Repeat, unable to locate one of our inmates. This is a potentially violent case.
Enterprise acknowledging. Stand by. Security alert three.
Security alert, condition three. All sections go to alert condition three. We may have an intruder aboard.
Repeat, all sections to alert condition three. Intruder aboard.
(to intruder who has swapped overall with technician) Hey, you from Engineering! (runs) Bridge. Section C, deck fourteen.
Captain, section C deck fourteen, reporting trouble. Someone in Engineering uniform.
Security control, this is the Bridge. Come in.
I have them, Captain. Closing off deck fourteen, search in progress.
Security alert, condition three. (intruder jumps one of the security men) Approximately six foot four male, early forties. Approach with caution. This man's extremely dangerous.
Repeat, approach with extreme caution. Bridge out.
Negative in the deck area, Captain. He may have gotten out. Expanding search to adjoining sections.
Enterprise to Tantalus colony.
Tantalus colony. Adams here.
Doctor Adams? This is Captain Kirk. It appears we may have an inmate of yours aboard the ship.
Transporter crewman found unconscious, Captain. Cargo case open and empty.
Make that definite, Doctor. He's aboard.
Terribly sorry, Captain. I take all the blame. Let me repeat, he's clever as well as extremely violent. Take all possible precautions.
We'll keep you posted, Doctor. Kirk out.
Interesting. Your Earth people glorify organised violence for forty centuries, but you imprison those who employ it privately.
And, of course, your people found an answer.
We disposed of emotion, Doctor. Where there is no emotion there is no motive for violence. 
Where's the captain? Which one of you is the captain?
I'm Captain Kirk.
My name is Van Gelder. I want asylum.
At gunpoint?
I want your promise first, your word that you won't take me back there, to Tantalus.
No promises. Give me the weapon.
No! No. No, I'm not going back! I'll disable your vessel first. You choose, Captain. I'll destroy your control panel.
Take him to Sickbay. Reverse course. Head back for Tantalus colony.
Abnormal, of course, but it's not schizophrenia, tissue damage, or any condition I'm acquainted with, Jim. And you know after getting him here, it took almost a triple dose of sedative to put him under.
Your report said he was quite talkative.
But not very informative. He claimed one thing, then he seemed to forget, and then he'd start to claim something else, but always with just the ring of truth in it. I'd sure like to study this one, Jim.
Not our problem, Bones.
You smart, button-pushing brass hat. Wash your hands of it. Is that your system? You're both quite sure of yourselves, aren't you? Quite expert. Take him back. Let someone else worry about him.
What did you say your name was?
My name? My name is Simon Van Gelder. (in great pain) I was the director of, director at the Tantalus colony.
You see what I mean?
I was a graduate of, of. I was assistant to Doctor. I knew. I knew, but they've erased it.
Erased?
Edited, adjusted, subverted me, but I won't forget! I won't forget! You, you're so blind ignorant. You believe I belong back there, don't you? Dead or alive. Well, I won't let you take me back. I'm not going! I'll die first! Do you hear? I'm not going! No! No! No.
Estimated arrival at Tantalus?
Fifty seven minutes, thirty seconds, Captain.
What's so fascinating?
An identification tape from our ship's library on Doctor Simon Van Gelder.
Doctor Van Gelder?
Doctor Van Gelder, Captain. No mistake. There's a full ID tape on him.
Committed to Tantalus colony when?
Assigned there six months ago as Doctor Adams' associate.
Ship to surface, Tantalus colony.
Hailing frequency's open, sir.
U.S.S. Enterprise to Tantalus colony.
Tantalus.
This is Captain Kirk. I'd like to speak to Doctor Adams.
Stand by, Enterprise.
Captain Kirk, Doctor Adams here.
Doctor Adams, regarding your escaped man
Is Doctor Van Gelder all right? And your people, no injuries?
No casualties, sir. This man is Doctor Simon Van Gelder?
Yes, of course. You're certain he's all right? We've been very concerned. In the violent state he's in
No harm to him, sir. We thought you might enlighten us as to his condition.
He'd been doing some experimental work, Captain, an experimental beam we'd hoped might rehabilitate incorrigibles. Van Gelder felt he hadn't the moral right to expose another man to something he hadn't tried on his own person.
Tragedy, Doctor.
Jim, that doesn't quite ring true.
Er, Doctor Adams, please stand by. Explain.
I don't believe him. I can't explain it, but the more I study that patient
You don't believe him, and you can't explain it. Bones, are you aware that in the last twenty years Doctor Adams has done more to revolutionise, to humanise prisons and the treatment of prisoners than all the rest of humanity had done in forty centuries? I've been to those penal colonies since they've begun following his methods, and they're not cages anymore.
Jim
They're clean, decent hospitals for sick minds.
Jim, listen!
Gentlemen, I suggest you ask Doctor Adams if he wants Van Gelder returned.
Doctor Adams, regarding Van Gelder.
Yes, Captain. May I inquire about your patrol destinations? Are you passing near any hospital facilities superior to ours? I'd like Van Gelder to have the best possible treatment, of course.
Thank you, Doctor. I'll take it up with the ship's surgeon. Stand by. Well, Bones, you've got the ball. You care to recommend a better place?
There are no superior facilities, he knows that. But that's not the question. If something unusual is going on down there
An assumption, Doctor.
I'm required to enter any reasonable doubts into my medical log. That requires you to answer in your log. Sorry, Jim.
Doctor Adams, this is rather embarrassing. By strict interpretation of our starship regulation, I'm required to initiate an investigation of this so that a proper report
No need to apologise, Captain Kirk. In fact, I'd take it as a personal favour if you'd beam down and look into it yourself. I'm sure you realise we don't get too many visitors here. Oh, I, er, Captain, I would appreciate it if you could come down with a minimum staff. We're forced to limit outside contact as much as possible.
Affirmative, Doctor. I've visited rehab colonies before. Enterprise out. Find me someone in your department with psychiatric and penology experience, if possible.
Yes, sir.
Mission, routine investigation and report as per ship surgeon's medical log. As for my last entry, it seems I will get to meet Doctor Adams at last. However, I would have preferred other circumstances. Sickbay. Report, Doctor.
Van Gelder's still violently agitated, Captain.
And you'd prefer to keep him here until I complete my investigation anyway.
I believe we should, Jim.
Oh, I'm assigning your technical aide, Captain. One of our psychiatrists does have a background in rehabilitative therapy. Doctor Noel, standing by in the transporter room now.
Thank you, Doctor. Bridge out. Mister Spock.
Co-ordinates?
Locked in, sir. Ready to beam down.
Doctor Helen Noel, Captain. We've met. Don't you remember the science lab Christmas party?
Yes, I remember.
You dropped in
Yes, yes, I remember.
Problem, Captain?
Mister Spock, you tell McCoy that she had better check out as the best assistant I ever had. Energise.
Energise.
In here, I presume, Doctor.
Perhaps it would be simpler if you called me Helen, Captain, since
This is another time, another place, and another situation.
Of course, Captain.
Elevator, and going down quite a ways.
(in his arms) I wouldn't recommend it for weak hearts.
Hello Captain Kirk, and er
Doctor Helen Noel. It's a pleasure to finally meet you, sir.
Thank you. Thank you, Captain. Welcome to Devil's Island, Doctor.
Perhaps you'll call me Helen, Doctor. With so many titles around, we're not going to be sure who's talking to who.
I shall indeed. Won't you?
Thank you.
I believe regulations call for me to check my weapon.
No, no. That won't be necessary in your case, Captain. Just keep it out of sight, hmm? I know you people feel as naked without a weapon as we do without a medikit. A small toast. Do you mind? It's such a great day for us here on Tantalus when we have visitors, no matter what the excuse.
Doctor.
Oh, now, Captain, you made your apology from upstairs. Now forget it. I don't think you'll be able to get through the security screen, Captain. Just a second, hmm? There. Now try it.
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Enterprise. Spock here.
Your landing co-ordinates were right on the nose, Mister Spock. We arrived safely, and we're here with Doctor Adams right now. Kirk out.
Affirmative, Captain. Enterprise out.
Ah, Lethe, come in. Lethe, this is Captain Kirk and Doctor Helen Noel. Lethe came to us for rehabilitation and stayed on as a therapist, and a very good one too, I might add.
I love my work.
Go right ahead, Captain.
Before you came here
I was another person, malignant, hateful.
May I ask what crime you committed?
Does it matter? That person no longer exists.
Um, part of our cure, if you will, Captain, is to bury the past. Why should a person go on living with unbearable memories if there's no necess. Oh, I feel quite sure that you'd concur with me in that, Doctor. Helen.
A shifting of memory patterns is basic to psychotherapy.
Yes. And now to the toast, hmm? You'll forgive us, Lethe. There you are, Captain. To all mankind. May we never find space so vast, planets so cold, heart and mind so empty that, that we cannot fill them with love and warmth.
Quite a tour, Doctor. Very impressive.
Thank you. Hi, Carl.
Doctor.
Yes?
Hmm?
Ah. I was afraid you would ask about this, Captain. One doesn't like to talk about their personal failures, you know? It was just an experiment that went wrong, I'm afraid.
May I see it?
Captain, if something hasn't worked out and therefore has no scientific fact
Shall we leave it up to the doctor?
Since you brought me down here for advice, Captain
One of the advantages of being a Captain, Doctor, is being able to ask for advice without necessarily having to take it.
I think I'll have to award that round to the Captain, Helen. You're fighting over your weight. All right, let's take a look.
I'm not a criminal! I do not require neural neutraliser.
Neural neutraliser. Can you explain that, Doctor Van Gelder?
A room. A device. Door. Control panel. I see it. A device. A light! The light!
This room. What happens there?
(screams)
A neural neutraliser. Experimental. Actually, we don't expect to get much use out of it at all. That beam from above neutralises brain waves, relaxes the patient's mind. Does them no harm, of course, and the effects are only temporary.
One question, Doctor. If it doesn't do any good
Why do we go on using it, hmm, Captain? Hope. Yes, yes, there's always that slight chance that it might do some good in the more violent cases.
Tranquillisers are fine, Captain, but to continually pump chemicals into a person's bloodstream
Exactly my point, Helen. Yes. Shall we? (he and Noel leave)
(to therapist) How does it work?
Captain, you remind me of the ancient sceptic who demanded of the wise old sage to be taught all the world's wisdom while standing on one foot.
Beam neutralising has been experimented with on Earth, Captain. I'm not acquainted with this particular style of equipment, but I can assure you that Doctor Adams has not created a chamber of horrors here.
I didn't mean to suggest that he had. The reason I asked, sir, was you haven't mentioned where Doctor Van Gelder's injury occurred.
Right here, Captain. Yes, Simon was a very stubborn man. He could've sat in that room for years with the beam at that volume or even higher. Or if he simply had someone standing by to snap it off in case he got into trouble, but, but no. He tried it alone and on full volume. It's a pity.
(to therapist) Thank you. (leaves)
Can you give us your present location, Captain?
In Doctor Adams' study, Mister Spock. Why?
Then you're with Doctor Adams now.
Affirmative.
Captain, Van Gelder has made reference to a particular treatment room. The term was neural neutraliser.
Yes. He was injured there. I've seen the room. Doctor Adams explained
the mistake Van Gelder made.
Go ahead, Mister Spock. Anything further?
Your Mister Spock sounds like a very excellent second in command, Captain Kirk. Please tell him to go ahead and speak freely. I have to check in with a member of my staff anyway.
Thank you, Doctor Adams.
Excuse me.
Stand by, Mister Spock. Doctor Adams has left with some things to attend to. What is it, Mister Spock?
Van Gelder is extremely agitated, Captain, and warns that you are in danger.
Oh, that's foolish.
Please repeat, Captain. I didn't receive that.
Tell McCoy the technical expert he sent along with me insists that any concern is unjustified. According to Adams, Van Gelder created his own problem.
He's suffering from
neuro-synapse damage, as if his brain were short-circuited. It's no wonder he's having delusions.
McCoy here. Received and understood.
But we still have some doubts up here, Captain. Can you tell us any more?
Not really.
When do you plan to beam back up, Captain?
I think we'll spend the night here, Mister Spock.
No! No, no, no.
And you will continue to check in every four hours?
Affirmative.
Kirk out.
No! No. No, don't let them! You must warn your captain. No! No! Don't let him stay! Don't let him stay! Don't! No. No. Don't hypo me. Please, don't hypo me. I'll try not to fight. I'll try. But you must listen. Warn your Captain. Doctor Adams. Doc, Doctor Adams will destroy.
Destroy how? What?
Right death.
Enterprise log. First officer Spock, acting captain. I must now use an ancient Vulcan technique to probe into Van Gelder's tortured mind.
Spock, if there's the slightest possibility it might help.
I've never used it on a human, Doctor.
If there's any way we can look into this man's mind to see if what he's seeing is real or delusion
It's a hidden, personal thing to the Vulcan people, part of our private lives.
Now look, Spock, Jim Kirk could be in real trouble. Will it work or not?
It could be dangerous. Do you understand? It requires I make pressure changes in your nerves, your blood vessels.
You must open my mind. Let me warn you and explain to you.
This will not affect you, Doctor McCoy, only the person I touch. It is not hypnosis.
I understand. (Spock puts his hands on Gelder's face) Good, the reading's levelling.
You begin to feel a strange euphoria. Your body floats.
Yes, I begin to feel it.
Open your mind. We move together. Our minds sharing the same thoughts.
Good evening.
Good evening.
What did you think of the inmates we saw here this afternoon?
You could've waited until tomorrow morning to ask me that, Captain.
I didn't.
I thought they were happy, well-adjusted.
But a bit blank.
Captain, if you're questioning the methods of a man like Tristan Adams
I'd like to see that treatment room again. You say you're somewhat familiar with the theory behind it?
Yes, somewhat, but if you'd simply state any doubts you have to Doctor Adams
And if he's lying, he'll continue to lie, and I won't find out a thing. The only way I can be sure is to see that machine at work, or is that too impractical and unscientific of me, Doctor? Well?
Coming.
What is our name? Who are we?
We are Simon Van Gelder.
Doctor Adams. The neural neutraliser. What did he do to us?
He can reshape any mind he chooses. He used it to erase our memories, put his own thoughts there. He was surprised it took so much power. We fought him, remember? But we grew so tired, our minds so blank, so open, that any thought he placed there became our thoughts. Our minds so empty like a sponge, needing thoughts, begging. Empty. Loneliness. So lonely to be sitting there empty, wanting any word from him. Love.
Yes.
Hate.
Yes.
Live.
Yes.
Die.
Yes.
Such agony to be empty.
Empty.
Lonely.
Lonely.
So empty.
Empty.
So empty.
I have no desire to damage my brain. Can this be handled with reasonable safety? Yes or no?
Yes.
And will you be able to determine if that beam is harming me in the slightest?
Yes, Captain. I know my profession. (Kirk sits in treatment chair) Ready?
Mm-hmm.
We'll try minimum intensity, a second or two. (light turns)
Anytime you're ready, Doctor, just for a second or two.
We already tried it for that long, Captain.
Nothing happened.
Something happened. Your face went completely blank.
Try a harmless suggestion.
(light turns) You're hungry.
You know, when we finally get through this I'd like to locate and raid a kitchen somewhere.
I put that suggestion in your mind, Captain. I said simply that you were hungry.
Remarkably effective for a device that Doctor Adams was going to abandon.
I think we should try this again.
Yes. Pick something unusual, an unusual suggestion, something we can both be sure of.
(light turns) At the Christmas party, we met, we danced, you talked about the stars. I suggest now that it happened in a different way. You swept me off my feet and carried me to your cabin.
Merry Christmas.
Captain, if your crew saw you carry me here.
My crew is sworn to secrecy.
But my reputation. I mean, just having met like this. Of course, it would be different if you cared for me.
You want me to manufacture a lie, wrap it up as a Christmas present for you?
No, I prefer honesty. (they kiss)
Now Captain Kirk is going to have a complete demonstration. I want there to be no doubts whatsoever in his mind. Mmm. You're madly in love with Helen, Captain. You'd lie, cheat, steal for her, sacrifice your career, your reputation.
No, Doctor! No!
The pain. Do you feel it, Captain? You must have her, or the pain grows worse, the pain, the longing for her.
Helen.
No.
For years, you've loved her, Captain, for years.
For years, I've loved you.
You must continue to remember that, Captain. And now, she's gone. (machine to maximum)
Helen! Helen, don't go! I need you, Helen!
(reduces intensity) Now Captain, you must take your phaser weapon and drop it on the floor. Captain, the pain increases unless you obey me.
I must drop it.
Very good, Captain. Very good indeed. And now your communicator. Drop it on the floor.
Kirk to Enterprise. Argh! (machine to maximum) Kirk to Enterprise. Argh!
No!
They've taken you from the room, Captain. You're in your own quarters now.
Helen. Helen, for years I've loved you. Helen.
Try to remember.
I've loved you.
He placed all that in your mind.
For years.
Remember. Doctor Adams took the controls away from me. Do you remember the pain and then his voice? Remember?
Yes. Yes, I remember. I remember. Helen. Look. The duct. The duct. Give me a hand here. Pull. (cover comes open) Air conditioning. It has to connect with other ducts and tunnels. You can get through this. It might lead to the power supply. Short-circuited, it would cut off the security force field. Have you had any training in hyper-power circuits?
No.
Megavoltage. Touch the wrong line, and you're dead.
Anything's better than Adams' treatment room. (he closes the cover behind her and the door opens) Time for another treatment?
Please don't fight me, Captain. The pain only gets worse when you doubt me. You believe in me completely.
I believe in you.
You trust me completely.
I trust you.
Excellent, Captain. I compliment you. Do you know Doctor Van Gelder was down on his hands and knees sobbing at this point? It was so gratifying. I'm so fortunate to have had a couple of excellent specimens to, to work with. I've learned a great deal.
The woman doctor. She's gone, Doctor Adams.
Notify security at once, Lethe. Where is she, Captain?
I, argh, I don't know.
Where is Helen And with what instructions?
I don't know. (collapses)
Emergency channel D.
It's no good, Mister Spock. I can't break through their force field.
Keep trying.
Put him back in the chair, Eli, and find that girl. (Kirk knocks them both out and leaves)
Mister Spock, the force field is gone. I can send you right to the source of the interruption.
(to McCoy) Get some security people and follow me down. Energise.
(pushes a load of buttons) Enterprise, this is Spock. Force field has been eliminated. (turns main power back on again)
Captain. Captain?
(helps her out of vent) Helen, are you all right? (kisses her)
Yes. This isn't right, Captain. (Spock enters) Doctor Adams did this to you.
Doctor Adams? Doctor A. The treatment room. Follow me.
Jim! (Kirk turns machine off)
The power came on.
He's dead, Captain.
The machine wasn't on high enough to kill.
But he was alone. Can you imagine the mind emptied by that thing? Without even a tormentor for company.
I understand.
Oh, Captain, there was a message from Tantalus colony, sir.
It was from Van Gelder. He thought you'd like to know the treatment room had been dismantled and the equipment destroyed.
Thank you.
It's hard to believe that a man could die of loneliness.
Not when you've sat in that room. Take us out of orbit, Mister Spock. Ahead warp factor one.
Acknowledged, Captain. Warp factor one.
The Corbomite Maneuver
One degree to overlap. Stand by to photograph. Now.
Three days of this now, sir. Other ships must have made star maps of some of this.
Negative, Lieutenant. We are the first to reach this far.
Sir, contact with an object. It's moving toward us. No visual contact yet.
Deflectors, full intensity.
It's coming at light speed.
Collision course.
Evasive maneuvers, Mister Sulu.
Object changing direction, too, sir. Keeps coming at us.
I'm getting no signal from it, sir.
Still collision course. Deflectors aren't stopping it.
Sound alarm.
It's slowing down, Mister Spock.
Countermand alarm. All engines full stop.
Visual contact.
Ahead slow. Steer a course around it, Mister Sulu.
It's blocking the way!
Quite unnecessary to raise your voice, Mister Bailey. All engines stop. Sound the alert.
Bridge to all decks. Condition alert. All decks, condition alert. Captain Kirk to the Bridge.
Just a few seconds more.
(on back, pumping pedals) Just a few seconds more.
That's a boy. Keep it up. Work up a little sweat, it'll will do you good. (notices red alert)
You're killing me. You're killing me.
Stop. Winded?
You'd be the last one I'd tell. (sees light, goes to desk monitor) Kirk here. What's going on?
Have a look at this, Captain.
What's that?
Undetermined. Whatever it is, it's blocking our way. When we move, it moves as well.
A vessel of some kind?
Negative. More some type of device.
I'll be right up. You could see the alarm lights flashing from there, McCoy. Why didn't you tell me?
Finally finished a physical on you, didn't I. (Kirk leaves) What am I, a doctor or a moon shuttle conductor? If I jumped every time a light came on around here, I'd end up talking to myself.
All decks alert. All decks alert.
Bridge. Captain to Bridge.
Spock here.
Any changes?
Negative. Whatever it is, it seems to just want to hold us here.
Any indication of danger from it?
Negative.
I'll change first then. Captain out.
All decks have reported green, Mister Bailey.
Yes, sir.
And when the Captain arrives he will expect a full report on
The cube's range and position. I'll have it by then. Raising my voice back there doesn't mean I was scared or couldn't do my job. It means I happen to have a human thing called an adrenaline gland.
It does sound most inconvenient, however. Have you considered having it removed?
Very funny.
You try to cross brains with Spock, he'll cut you to pieces every time.
Captain to Bridge.
Spock here.
Any signs of life?
Negative.
Have you tried all hailing frequencies?
Affirmative. No answer from the cube.
Have the department heads meet me on the Bridge.
Already standing by.
Reporting, sir. Sensors show it is solid, but its composition is unknown to us.
Lieutenant Uhura.
Hailing frequencies still open, sir. I get no message from it.
Navigation.
Distance from us, fifteen hundred ninety three metres, position constant.
Each of its edges measures one hundred seven metres. Mass, a little under eleven thousand metric tons.
Scotty.
Motive power? Beats me what makes it go.
I'll buy speculation.
I'd sell it if I had any. That's a solid cube. How something like that can sense us coming, block us, move when we move, well it beats me. That's my report.
Life sciences.
Same report.
Sir, we going to just let it hold us here? We've got phaser weapons. I vote we blast it.
I'll keep that in mind, Mister Bailey, when this becomes a democracy.
Anything further, gentlemen?
I believe it adds up to either one of two possibilities. First, a space buoy of some kind.
Second?
Flypaper.
And you don't recommend sticking around.
Negative. It would make us appear too weak.
It's time for action, gentlemen. Mister Bailey
Bridge to Phaser Gun Crew
Countermand. I'll select what kind of action.
I'm sorry, sir. I thought you meant
Are you explaining Mister Bailey? I haven't requested an explanation. Now, as I was about to say, Navigator, plot us a spiral course away from the cube.
Yes, sir. We'll try pulling away from it.
Yes, sir. Helmsman to Engine Room, stand by. All decks alert. We're going to try pulling away.
Course plotted and laid in, sir.
Engage, Mister Sulu. Quarter speed.
Point two five, sir. Still blocking us, sir.
Let's see if it'll give way. Ahead half speed.
Point five oh, sir.
Radiation from the short end of the spectrum increasing.
All stop. Hold position.
It's still coming toward us. Range, one hundred ninety metres.
Radiation increasing.
Power astern, half speed.
Half speed.
Radiation nearing the tolerance level.
Still coming, gaining on us.
Engines astern, full speed.
Full speed.
Range one hundred twenty five metres now.
Helm, give us warp speed.
Warp one, sir.
Radiation at the tolerance level.
Warp two, sir. Speed is now warp three.
Radiation passing the tolerance level, entering lethal zone.
Range fifty one metres and still closing, sir.
Phaser Crew stand ready.
Phaser Crew reports ready, sir.
Growing. We can take only a few more seconds of this.
Lock phasers on target. Mister Bailey, lock phasers.
Phasers locked on target, sir. At point-blank range and closing.
Fire main phasers.
Nothing, Captain. No contacts, no objects in any direction.
Care to speculate on what we'll find if we go on ahead?
Speculate? No. Logically, we'll discover the intelligence which sent out the cube.
Intelligence different from ours or superior?
Probably both, and if you're asking the logical decision to make
No, I'm not. The mission of the Enterprise is to seek out and contact alien life.
Has it occurred to you that there's a certain inefficiency in constantly questioning me on things you've already made up your mind about?
It gives me emotional security. Navigator, set a course ahead.
Plotted. Laid in, sir.
Engage.
Warp one, sir.
Mister Bailey, phaser crews were sluggish. You were slow in locking them into your directional beam. Helmsman, engineering decks could have been faster, too. Programme a series of simulated attacks and evasion maneuvers. Keep repeating the exercise until we're proficient, gentlemen.
Yes, sir.
Yes, sir.
Your timing is lousy, Jim.
Your men are tired.
Captain's quarters. Aren't you the one who always says a little suffering is good for the soul?
I never say that.
This is the Bridge. Prepare for simulated attack.
I'm especially worried about Bailey. Navigator's position's rough enough for a seasoned man.
I think he'll cut it.
Oh? How so sure? Because you spotted something you liked in him, something familiar, like yourself say about, oh, eleven years ago?
On the double, deck five! Give me a green light.
Why, Doctor, you've been reading your textbooks again?
I don't need textbooks to know you could've promoted him too fast. Listen to that voice.
Condition alert. Battle stations.
Engineering, deck five, report. Phaser crews, come on, let's get with it. Phaser station two, where's your green light?
What's next? They're not machines, Jim?
Well, they're not. After what they've been through they really should
Doctor McCoy, I've heard you say that man is ultimately superior to any mechanical device.
No, I never say that, either.
I could've sworn I heard you say that. Kirk here.
Exercise rating, Captain. Ninety four percent.
Let's try for one hundred, Mister Spock.
Agreed.
What are you going to do with that six percent when they give it to you, Jim?
I'm going to take it, and I'm going to (door opens)
Excuse me, sir. It's past time you had something to eat, sir.
What the devil is this? Green leaves?
It's dietary salad, sir. Doctor McCoy ordered your diet card changed. I thought you knew.
Your weight was up a couple of pounds, remember?
Will you stop hovering over me, Yeoman?
Well, I'll change it if you don't like it, sir.
Bring some for the doctor, too.
No, no. No, I never eat until the crew eats.
Thank you, Yeoman.
You're welcome, sir. (leaves)
This is the Bridge. All decks prepare to better reaction time on second simulated attack.
When I find the headquarters genius that assigned me a female yeoman
What's the matter, Jim. Don't you trust yourself?
I've already got a female to worry about. Her name's the Enterprise.
Engineering decks alert. Phaser crews, let's
Kirk here.
We're picking up an object, sir. Much larger, coming toward us.
Coming.
Exceptionally strong contact. Not visual yet. Distant spectrograph. Metallic, similar to cube. Much greater energy reading.
There, sir.
Half speed. Prepare for evasive action.
Reducing to warp two, sir.
Tractor beam, Captain. Something's grabbed us, hard.
Engines overloading, sir.
All engines stop.
All engines stopped, sir.
Phaser crews stand ready.
Bridge to phaser crews, stand ready.
Forward phaser, will comply. All weapons at operational ready.
Fascinating.
What's its mass, Mister Spock?
Reading goes off my scale, Captain. Must be a mile in diameter.
Over five thousand metres away, and it still fills the screen.
Reduce image. Let me see all of it.
Magnification two five, sir. Magnification one eight point five, sir.
Ship to ship.
Hailing frequencies open, sir.
This is the United Earth ship Enterprise. We convey greetings and await your reply. What is it, Mister Bailey?
A message coming over my navigation beam.
Pick it up.
Switching, sir.
And trespassed into our star systems. This is Balok, Commander of the flagship Fesarius of the First Federation. Your vessel, obviously the product of a primitive and savage civilisation, having ignored a warning buoy and having then destroyed it, has demonstrated your intention is not peaceful. We are now considering the disposition of your ship and the life aboard.
Ship to ship.
Hailing frequencies open, sir.
This is the Captain of the Enterprise speaking. The warning nature of your space buoy was unknown to us. Our vessel was blocked. When we attempted to disengage
Captain, we're being invaded by exceptionally strong sensor probes everywhere. Our electrical systems, our engines.
No further communication will be accepted. If there is the slightest hostile move, your vessel will be destroyed immediately.
They're shutting off some of our systems, Captain. Brilliant. Extremely sophisticated in their methods.
Does the recorder marker have this on its tapes?
Enough to warn other Earth ships.
Mister Bailey, dispatch recorder marker. Mister Bailey?
Recorder marker dispatched, sir.
Marker on course. Heading back the way we (big bang)
Your recorder marker has been destroyed. You have been examined. Your ship must be destroyed. We make assumption you have a deity or deities or some such beliefs which comfort you. We therefore grant you ten Earth time periods known as minutes to make preparations.
Might be interesting to see what they look like if I can locate where that voice is coming from. (McCoy and Scott enter)
Balok's message. It was heard all over the ship.
Captain to crew. Those of you who have served for long on this vessel have encountered alien lifeforms. You know the greatest danger facing us is ourselves, an irrational fear of the unknown. But there's no such thing as the unknown, only things temporarily hidden, temporarily not understood. In most cases we have found that intelligence capable of a civilisation is capable of understanding peaceful gestures. Surely a lifeform advanced enough for space travel is advanced enough to eventually understand our motives. All decks stand by. Captain out. Ship to ship.
Hailing frequencies open, sir.
This is the Captain of the USS Enterprise. We came seeking friendship but we have no wish to trespass. To demonstrate our goodwill, our vessel will now return the way it came. We (humming noise) Lay in a course ahead, Mister Bailey.
What? A course?
Plotted and laid in, sir.
Engage, warp factor one.
Warp factor. There's no response.
Switch to impulse.
All engine systems show dead, and weapon systems.
Switching to screen. I believe I can get something visual.
You are wasting time and effort. There is no escape. You have eight Earth minutes left.
I was curious to see how they appeared.
Yes, of course you were.
I don't understand this. Spock's wasting time. Everybody else just sitting around. Somebody's got to do something.
Easy, Bailey.
What do they want from us? Let's find out what they want us to do.
They want us to lose our heads.
We've only got eight minutes left.
Seven minutes and forty five seconds.
He's doing a countdown!
Practically end of watch.
What, are you all out of your minds? End of watch? It's the end of everything. What are you, robots? Wound-up toy soldiers? Don't you know when you're dying? Watch and regulations and orders What do they mean?
Bailey, you're relieved! Escort him to his quarters, Doctor.
Let's go. (McCoy and Bailey leave)
Ship to ship.
Hailing frequencies open, sir.
This is the Captain of the Enterprise speaking. It is the custom of Earth people to try and avoid misunderstanding whenever possible. We destroyed your space buoy as a simple act of self-preservation. When we attempted to move away from it, it emitted radiation harmful to our species. If you've examined our ship and its tapes, you know this to be true. (humming noise)
You now have seven minutes left.
Four minutes, thirty seconds.
You have an annoying fascination for timepieces, Mister Sulu.
Jim.
Four minutes.
What's the matter with them out there? They must know we mean them no harm.
They're certainly aware by now that we're totally incapable of it.
There must be something to do, something I've overlooked.
In chess, when one is outmatched, the game is over. Checkmate.
Is that your best recommendation?
I'm s, I regret that I can find no other logical alternative.
Assuming we get out of this, Captain
Nobody's given up yet.
Well, then about Bailey. Let me enter it in my medical records as simple fatigue.
That's my decision, Doctor.
And your mistake. You overworked him, pushed him, expected too much from him.
I'm ordering you to drop it. I have no time for you, your theories, your quaint philosophies.
I intend to challenge your actions in my records. I'll state that I warned you about Bailey's condition. Now that's no bluff.
Any time you can bluff me, Doctor.
Three minutes.
All right, Doctor. Let's hope we have time to argue about it. Not chess, Mister Spock, poker. Do you know the game? Ship to ship.
Hailing frequencies open, sir.
This is the Captain of the Enterprise. Our respect for other lifeforms requires that we give you this warning. One critical item of information that has never been incorporated into the memory banks of any Earth ship. Since the early years of space exploration, Earth vessels have had incorporated into them a substance known as corbomite. It is a material and a device which prevents attack on us. If any destructive energy touches our vessel, a reverse reaction of equal strength is created, destroying
You now have two minutes.
Destroying the attacker! It may interest you to know that since the initial use of corbomite more than two of our centuries ago, no attacking vessel has survived the attempt. Death has little meaning to us. If it has none to you then attack us now. We grow annoyed at your foolishness.
However, it was well played. I regret not having learned more about this Balok. In some manner he was reminiscent of my father.
Then may heaven have helped your mother.
Quite the contrary. She considered herself a very fortunate Earth woman.
Doc. Sorry.
For having other things on your mind? My fault. I don't how the devil you keep from punching me in the face.
One minute. I knew he would. (Bailey enters) If anyone's interested, thirty seconds.
Request permission to return to post, sir.
Permission granted.
Eleven, ten seconds, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
A very interesting game, this poker.
It does have advantages over chess.
Love to teach it to you.
This is the Commander of the Fesarius.
Here it comes. Is it raise or call?
The destruction of your vessel has been delayed. We will relent in your destruction only if we have proof of your corbomite device.
Hold on that. Let him sweat for a change. Ship to ship.
Hailing frequencies, sir.
Request denied.
I have visual contact, Captain.
We will soon inform you of our decision regarding your vessel. And having permitted your primitive efforts to see my form, I trust it has pleased your curiosity. And now, another demonstration of our superiority.
I thought the power was off in the galley.
I used a hand phaser, and zap. Hot coffee.
Something's going on, Captain. (something leaves the Fesarius)
It's a small ship.
About two thousand metric tons.
It has been decided that I will conduct you to a planet of the First Federation which is capable of sustaining your lifeform. There you will disembark and be interned. Your ship will be destroyed, of course.
Engine systems coming on, Captain.
Do not be deceived by the size of this pilot vessel. It has an equal potential to destroy your vessel.
Tractor beam again.
So that you may sustain your gravity and atmosphere, your systems are now open. Escape is impossible since you are being taken under our power to your destination. Any move to escape or destroy this ship will result in the instant destruction of the Enterprise and everyone aboard.
We're being towed, sir.
Captain, he's pulling out a little ahead of us.
He's sneaked power down a bit.
Our speed is down to point six four of light.
I want a right angled course. Shear away from him no matter which way he turns.
Yes, sir.
Maximum acceleration when I give the word.
Yes, sir.
Engage.
It's a strain, Captain. Engines are overloading.
More power.
We're superheating. Intermix temperature, seven thousand four hundred degrees. Seven five, seven six, eight thousand degrees. (everything is juddering, the little ship is getting brighter and brighter)
Shear away, Mister Bailey.
Two thousand degrees above maximum. Eight four, eight five, eight six. She'll blow soon!
Now, Mister Sulu. Impulse power two.
We're breaking free, sir.
All engines stop.
All engines stopped, sir.
Engines need work badly, Captain. Can you hold it here a few hours?
That may not be wise. He got a signal through to the mother ship.
Then we're not home yet.
A signal, Captain. It's very weak. It's Balok. It's a distress signal to the Fesarius. His engines are out. His life-sustaining system isn't operating. The message is repeating, sir.
Any reply?
Negative, sir. The signal is growing weak. Sir, I doubt if the mother ship could have heard it.
Plot a course for it, Mister Bailey.
For it, Captain?
Dead ahead. This is the Captain speaking. First Federation vessel is in distress. We're preparing to board it. There are lives at stake. By our standards, alien life but lives nevertheless. Captain out.
Course plotted and laid in, sir.
Mister Scott, ready the transporter room.
Aye, sir. (leaves)
Mister Sulu, bring us to within one hundred metres. Ahead slow.
Ahead slow, sir.
Jim, don't you think
What's the mission of this vessel, Doctor? To seek out and contact alien life, and an opportunity to demonstrate what our high-sounding words mean. Any questions? I'll take two men with me. Doctor McCoy to examine and treat the aliens if necessary, and you, Mister Bailey.
Sir?
The face of the unknown. I think I owe you a look at it.
Yes, sir.
Captain, request permission to
Denied. If I'm wrong, if it's a trap, I want you here.
Transporter ready?
Well, yes, sir, but it's risky. We're locked on what appears to be a main deck.
Air sample?
Breathable. In fact, a slightly higher oxygen content than our own. Communicator, phaser weapon.
Thank you, Scotty. Ready, Doctor?
No, but you won't let that stop you.
Bend low, gentlemen. It reads pretty cramped over there. Ready to transport.
Energise.
It's a dummy. A puppet of some kind.
I'm Balok. Welcome aboard. (curtain opens to reveal a small humanoid with big grin)
I'm Captain Kirk.
And McCoy and Bailey. Sit. Be comfortable. Go ahead, be seated. We must drink. This is tranya. I hope you relish it as much as I.
Commander Balok.
I know, I know, a thousand questions. But first, the tranya. Gentlemen. (drinks) Ahh.
Commander, that puppet.
My alter ego, so to speak. In your culture, he would be Mister Hyde to my Jekyll. You must admit he's effective. You would never have been frightened by me. And I thought my distress signal quite clever. It was a pleasure testing you.
Testing us?
I see.
I had to discover your real intentions.
But you probed our memory banks.
Your records could have been a deception on your part.
And your crew?
I have no crew, Doctor. I run everything, this entire complex, from this small ship. But I miss company, conversation. Even an alien would be welcome. Perhaps one of your men for some period of time. An exchange of information, cultures.
Yes. Both our cultures would benefit. Do you know where we can find a volunteer, Mister Bailey?
Me, sir. I'd like to volunteer.
Ah. You represent Earth's best, then.
No, sir, I'm not. I'll make plenty of mistakes.
But you'd find out more about us that way, and I'd get a better officer in return.
(laughs) I see. We think much alike, Captain, you and I. Now, before I bring back the Fesarius, let me show you my vessel. It is not often I have this pleasure. Yes, we're very much alike, Captain. Both proud of our ships.
The Menagerie Part 1
Welcome to Starbase Eleven, Captain. The Commodore's waiting to see you. He's curious why you suddenly changed course and came here.
We received a subspace message asking us to divert here immediately.
This base sent no message, Captain.
Oh, Jim, I just can't understand this.
Mister Spock received a starbase transmission, a message from the former commander of the Enterprise, Fleet Captain Pike, urgently requesting that we divert here.
Impossible.
If my first officer states he received a transmission from
Jim, I'm not doubting anyone's word. I'm simply telling you it's impossible.
Why?
You don't know? You actually don't know what's happened to Captain Pike? There's been subspace chatter about it for months. I'm sorry to have to be the one to show you. He's upstairs in the medical section.
You ever met Chris Pike?
When he was promoted to Fleet Captain.
About your age. Big, handsome man, vital, active.
I took over the Enterprise from him. Spock served with him for several years.
Eleven years, four months, five days.
What's his problem, Commodore?
Inspection tour of a cadet vessel. Old Class J starship. One of the baffle plates ruptured.
The delta rays?
He went in bringing out all those kids that were still alive. Just wanted you gentlemen to be prepared.
Captain Pike. (a scarred head and shoulders sticking out of wheelchair device) Captain, you remember these gentlemen. They wanted to visit you. Two flashes mean no. I thought you might make an exception for them. (flash, flash) I'm sorry, gentlemen.
Chris, if there's anything I can do for you. (flash, flash)
Captain Pike, may I remain for a moment? (flash, the others leave) You know why I've come, Captain. It's only six days away at maximum warp and I have it well-planned. (flash, flash) I have never disobeyed your orders before, Captain, but this time I must. (flash, flash) I know. I know it is treachery and it's mutiny. but I must do this. (flash, flash) I have no choice. (flash, flash)
Once more, Jose. Spock stated he received a message for us to come here. He entered same in his log. That's all the proof I require.
And what do those record tapes show? No message sent from here. No message received by your vessel.
Then I suggest the record tapes have been deliberately changed. A computer expert can change record tapes, duplicate voices, say anything, say nothing.
The fact remains that your first officer's former captain is hospitalised, horribly injured, at this base, and that same first officer seems to be the only one who heard that message.
If he had wanted to see Captain Pike he could have requested a leave. I would have granted it.
Well, that's true of course.
Who would want to divert us here? There's no trouble in the space sector we're patrolling now. No alien problems.
Computer Centre.
Chief Humboldt here, sir.
Have you rechecked all the record tapes on the date in question?
Yes, sir.
Is there any way at all a message could have been sent from here without us knowing it?
Negative, Commodore. We've checked and double-checked everything possible.
All right. Start checking the impossible. Mendez out.
Oh, have I introduced Miss Piper, Jim? This is Captain Kirk, Miss Piper.
I recognized the Captain immediately. A mutual friend described you, sir. Lieutenant Helen Johansson.
Helen described
She merely mentioned she knew you, sir.
You have something to report, Miss Piper?
Oh, yes, sir. I'm afraid our investigation turned up very little, Commodore. There is, of course, Mister Spock's years of service with Captain Pike. Indications of his extreme loyalty to this former commander.
Miss Piper, a Vulcan can no sooner be disloyal than he can exist without breathing. That goes for his present commander as well as his past.
We're forced to consider every possibility, sir. We can be certain Captain Pike cannot have sent a message. In his condition he's under observation every minute of every day.
And totally unable to move, Jim. His wheel chair is constructed to respond to his brain waves. Oh, he can turn it, move it forwards, or backwards slightly.
With the flashing light, he can say yes or no.
But that's it, Jim. That's as much as that poor devil can do. His mind is as active as yours and mine, but it's trapped inside a useless vegetating body. He's kept alive mechanically, a battery-driven heart.
There's no way he could even have asked for that message to be sent?
(slow) Starbase Operations. (fast) Starbase Operations. (Spock adjusts it to sound normal) Starbase Operations. Starbase Operations, Enterprise. Standby to receive new orders, Enterprise.
Starbase Operation, Mister Hansen.
Starbase Operations to Enterprise. Standby to receive new orders. They're to be fed directly into the ship's computers. This is top secret and scrambled.
Enterprise standing by. Request confirmation.
Enterprise to Starbase. Request confirmation.
Sir, this is a security area. What are you doing here?
I have security clearance, Chief.
Who gave you clearance? I haven't been notified. You're cross-circuiting the. (struggle) Whose tapes are these?
Repeat, Enterprise to Starbase. Orders received. We need operating confirmation from the ship's Captain. (Spock pinches the Chief unconscious)
Come in, Starbase. Come in, Captain Kirk.
This is Captain Kirk. You have confirmation, Miss Uhura.
Hansen here, Captain.
Our destination has been scramble-fed into ship's computers. Er, how can I handle the helm if I don't know where we're going?
(another chip) Mister Spock is with me here. He'll answer all questions. Kirk out.
This is Mister Spock.
The ship's computers will handle the helm on this voyage, Mister Hansen. Course will be computed and set automatically.
You will not discuss this with ship's crew or starbase personnel. Do you read?
Acknowledged, sir.
Stand by. We'll warp out of orbit in one hour.
(watching Pike on monitor) He keeps blinking no. No to what?
They've tried questioning him. He's almost agitated himself into a coma.
How long will he live?
As long as any of us. Blast medicine anyway. We've learned to tie into every human organ in the body except one. The brain. The brain is what life is all about. Now, that man can think any thought that we can, and love, hope, dream as much as we can, but he can't reach out, and no one can reach in.
He keeps blinking no.
No to what? They could question him for days, weeks, before they stumble on the right thing.
Bones, could this have anything to do with Spock?
I don't read you at all, Jim.
What I mean is either a message was received. It was one of two things. Either someone sent a message diverting us here, or someone on board the ship lied about receiving it. Could that someone be Mister Spock?
Jim, forgetting how well we both know Spock, the simple fact that he's a Vulcan means he's incapable of telling a lie.
He's also half human.
And that half is completely submerged. To be caught acting like us or even thinking like us would completely embarrass him.
Someone's interfering with my command and my ship. I don't know who it is, but I mean to find out. Even you. If I thought you had the technical know-how I'd suspect you, but you don't. Spock does.
He would not make a false entry.
There's a false entry in the log right now which doesn't jibe with the established facts. How do you explain that.
I can't, but to question Spock of all people? Me, yes. I could run off half-cocked given a good reason. So could you, but not Spock. It's impossible.
Doctor McCoy, report to Transporter Control. Doctor McCoy to Transporter Control.
McCoy here.
You're needed aboard the Enterprise, Doctor. Medical emergency.
Well, what is it? Sickness? Injury? How bad is it?
That's all we have on it, Doctor. Just needed aboard.
Probably somebody discovered a hangnail. I'll beam up and let you know, Jim.
(reading) For eyes of Starfleet Command only.
Oh, I'm certifying I ordered you to read it. Know anything at all about this planet?
What every ship Captain knows. General Order 7, no vessel under any condition, emergency or otherwise, is to visit Talos Four.
And to do so is the only death penalty left on our books. Only Fleet Command knows why. Not even this file explains that. (unlocks the magnetic strip) But it does name the only Earth ship that ever visited the planet.
The Enterprise, commanded by Captain Christopher Pike.
With a half Vulcan science officer named Spock.
Commodore! Captain Pike, he's gone!
Mendez here. What is it?
Starship Enterprise, Commodore. It's warping out of orbit. Refuses to acknowledge our signal.
Out of orbit, Mister Spock. Seems strange with no navigator on duty.
The Enterprise knows where she's going, Mister Hansen.
Someone's trying to hail us, sir.
Maintain radio silence, Lieutenant. This is First Officer Spock. Per Starfleet orders this date, I have been placed in temporary command of the Enterprise. While our destination is secret, our mission is relatively simple. Starbase Command has assigned Captain Kirk medical rest leave until our return. His instructions are that you will obey my orders as you would his. First Officer out.
What's going on around here? Who said Jim needed a medical rest leave? And this call about me being needed aboard the ship. I've checked everywhere.
And no one from the ship made such a call.
That's right.
Doctor, I regret they elected to keep certain things from you. Will you come with me, please.
What is this, Spock? Captain, are you all right? (flash, flash) I see that you're still signaling
Doctor, one moment, please.
Kirk to Doctor McCoy. I'm recording you this message, Bones, so there will be no misunderstanding. I'm sorry to have to make it an order. You're not to disturb Captain Pike with any questions. Simply take good care of him. Follow Spock's instructions to the letter. Kirk out. (flash, flash)
Sir, scanners report an object following us, about the size of a starbase shuttlecraft. Shall we reverse helm?
Take no action, Mister Hansen.
But at our speed, they'll never catch us. In case they want to reach us
You have your orders, Mister Hansen. We'll make no contact.
Starbase Shuttlecraft one to Enterprise. Come in, please. Enterprise, Commodore Mendez and Captain Kirk. If you read me, you are ordered to reply. Repeating it on all emergency frequencies, Jim.
Spock is headed for Talos Four, all right.
Pulling ahead of us fast. Fuel is down to sixty three point three. If we turn back now, we've just got barely enough to get us back to the base.
Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise, come in. Enterprise, come in!
Library computer.
Lock on to sensors. Measure object now following the Enterprise.
Computed. Object is a Class F shuttlecraft. Duranium metal shell, ion engine power
Stop. How long before shuttlecraft's fuel supply forces return to starbase?
Computed. Shuttlecraft is already past point of safe return.
We coast.
Blast you any way. You had no right to come along.
RHIP, Captain. Rank hath its privileges.
Two hours of oxygen left.
Wonderful.
Part of me is hoping the Enterprise won't come back for us. We step on that deck, Spock is finished. Court-martialed, disgraced.
He's dead if he makes it to Talos Four. Why would he want to get Pike there? The command reports stated Talos contained absolutely no practical benefits to mankind.
Spock would have some logical reason for going there.
Maybe. Maybe he's just gone mad.
I keep wondering who might be after us in a shuttlecraft and I keep coming up with the same answers, but I can't be right, can l, Mister Spock.
Computer control. Lock on to shuttlecraft following us.
Locked on. Tractor beam ready.
Go to tape Abel Seven Baker. Execute instructions.
Is it the captain, Mister Spock?
Sir, the engines are reversing. She's brought herself to a dead stop.
This is the First Officer speaking. Security, send an armed team to the Bridge. Transporter Room, stand by to beam Captain Kirk aboard. Effective until then, Lieutenant Hansen is in operational command.
Sir?
First Officer out. Doctor, as senior officer present, I present myself to you for arrest.
You what?
The charge is mutiny, Doctor. I never received orders to take command.
Security reporting, Mister Spock.
Doctor.
Mister Spock is, er, under arrest. Is confinement to quarters enough?
Adequate, Doctor. I'll make no trouble.
Well, confine him.
Yes, sir.
Store our shuttlecraft on the hangar deck, Mister Scott. Beam us directly aboard.
All right, Captain. Locked on to you.
Transferring command to you, sir.
Accepting command. Where's Mister Spock?
In his quarters, under arrest.
His quarters, after what he's done, Lieutenant?
Captain from Bridge. The engines are coming on.
Reverse power. Hold this position. Tell whoever gave those orders to report
Sir, there's nobody up there giving orders. Mister Spock has the computers running the ship.
Disengage computer control, Uhura.
We can't disengage, Captain. The helm does not respond. (Scott leaves, muttering in Gaelic)
Computer control, come in.
Computer.
Disengage from helm.
Unable to comply.
This is the Captain. On voice command, you will override all contrary instructions. Voice command, disengage from helm.
Unable to comply. Any such attempt will cross-circuit vessel's life-supporting system. Computer control cannot be disengaged until vessel reaches planet Talos Four.
This hearing is convened. Mister Spock, you're aware of your right to counsel of your choice?
Sir, I waive counsel. Further, I waive rights to this hearing and request immediate court-martial.
Request denied.
May I inquire on what grounds, Captain?
A mutiny requires a trial board of no less than three command officers. Since there are only two of that rank available
Sir, I must point out that there are three officers of command rank available. Yourself, Commodore Mendez, and Captain Christopher Pike.
Denied. Captain Pike is a complete invalid.
I believe you'll find he's still on the active duty list.
We didn't have the heart to retire him, Jim. He's got you. Whatever he's up to, he's planned it well.
Mister Spock, are you aware in pleading guilty that a further charge involving the death penalty must be held against you should this vessel enter the Talos star group?
I am.
Why? What does it accomplish to go there or to take Captain Pike there? I want to know why.
Are your comments a part of the record, sir?
Yes, it's on the record.
Thank you. Request monitor screen be engaged.
For what purpose?
To comply with the request you just made, sir, that I explain the importance of going to Talos Four.
By asking why, you've opened the door to any evidence he may wish to present. Apparently what he had in mind.
Present your evidence. Screen on.
This is thirteen years ago. The Enterprise and its commander, Captain Christopher Pike.
Definitely something out there, Captain, headed this way.
Screen off. Chris, was that really you on the screen? (flash) That's impossible. Mister Spock, no vessel makes record tapes in that detail, that perfect. What were we watching?
I cannot tell you at this time, sir.
Captain Pike, were any record tapes of this nature made during your voyage? (flash, flash) The court is not obliged to view evidence without knowing its source.
Unless the court asks a prisoner why, Commodore. You did ask that question.
You mean I was maneuvered into asking. Your evidence is out of order.
I am forced to contest that, Commodore. I want to see more.
You have that right, Captain, but just because the prisoner is your First Officer and your personal friend
That has nothing to do with it.
Very well, continue.
Screen on, Mister Scott.
As I stated, gentlemen, this was thirteen years ago. We were on routine patrol when the ship's sensors detected something ahead. At first we were not certain what it was.
It's coming at the speed of light. Collision course.
The meteorite beam has not deflected it, Captain.
Steady as we go. 
They were keyed to cause interference and attract attention this way.
I have a fix. It comes from the Talos star group.
Their call letters check with a survey expedition. S.S. Columbia disappeared in that region approximately eighteen years ago.
It would take that long for a radio beam to travel from there to here.
Records show the Talos group has never been explored. Solar system similar to Earth, eleven planets. Number four seems to be Class M, oxygen atmosphere.
If they survived the crash.
We aren't going to go, to be certain?
Not without any indication of survivors, no. Continue to the Vega Colony and take care of our own sick and injured first. You have the helm. Maintain present course.
Boyce here.
Drop by my cabin, Doctor. (Boyce enters with bag) What's that? I didn't say there's anything wrong with me.
I understand we picked up a distress signal.
That's right. Unless we get anything more positive on it, it seems to me the condition of our own crew takes precedent. I'd like to log the ship's doctor's opinion, too.
Oh, I concur with yours, definitely.
Good. I'm glad you do, because we're going to stop first at the Vega Colony and replace anybody who needs hospitalisation and also. What the devil are you putting in there, ice?
Who wants a warm martini?
What makes you think I need one?
Sometimes a man will tell his bartender things he'll never tell his doctor. What's been on your mind, Chris, the fight on Rigel seven?
Shouldn't it be? My own yeoman and two others dead, seven injured.
Was there anything you personally could have done to prevent it?
Oh, I should have smelled trouble when I saw the swords and the armour. Instead of that, I let myself get trapped in that deserted fortress and attacked by one of their warriors.
Chris, you set standards for yourself no one could meet. You treat everyone on board like a human being except yourself, and now you're tired and you
You bet I'm tired. You bet. I'm tired of being responsible for two hundred and three lives. I'm tired of deciding which mission is too risky and which isn't, and who's going on the landing party and who doesn't, and who lives and who dies. Boy, I've had it, Phil.
To the point of finally taking my advice, a rest leave?
To the point of considering resigning.
And do what?
Well, for one thing, go home. Nice little town with fifty miles of park land around it. Remember I told you I had two horses, and we used to take some food and ride out all day.
Ah, that sounds exciting. Ride out with a picnic lunch every day.
I said that's one place I might go. I might go into business on Regulus or on the Orion colony.
You, an Orion trader, dealing in green animal women, slaves?
The point is this isn't the only life available. There's a whole galaxy of things to choose from.
Not for you. A man either lives life as it happens to him, meets it head-on, and licks it, or he turns his back on it and starts to wither away.
Now you're beginning to talk like a doctor, bartender.
Take your choice. We both get the same two kinds of customers. The living and the dying.
Mister Spock here. We're intercepting a follow-up message, sir. There are crash survivors on Talos.
Address intercraft.
System open.
This is the captain. Our destination is the Talos star group.
Our time warp, factor seven.
Course computed and on the screen.
Engage.
Screen off. Mister Spock, I'm truly amazed at your technical prowess in somehow manufacturing all this. I congratulate you on your imagination. But this is a court of space law, not a theatre.
Captain, please tell the court this is not imagination, nor some clever photographic record. Are we seeing the actual events of thirteen years ago? (flash) Yes, gentlemen. On that screen as it happened, the incredible experience of Captain Christopher Pike on Talos Four. If, after witnessing this, the court wishes to turn this vessel back, I will release this ship to manual control.
You're in no position to bargain. This is ridiculous. This man mutinied, stole your ship, abducted Captain Pike. Well, for me this has gone far enough.
We still haven't heard the full story. I vote to continue.
And I vote we do not. Deadlock, and since I'm
Not a deadlock. There's still one member of the trial board to be heard from.
Very well. Captain Pike, it's up to you. Do we continue under these conditions? (flash)
Yes.
Screen on.
We've settled into orbit, sir.
Geological lab report complete, Captain.
Preliminary lab survey ready, sir.
Spectography?
Our reading shows an oxygen nitrogen atmosphere, sir, heavy with inert elements but well within safety limits.
Gravity?
Zero point nine of Earth.
Captain? Reflections, sir, from the planet's surface. As I read it, they polarise out as rounded metal bits. Could be parts of a spaceship hull.
Prep a landing party of six. You feel up to it?
Yes, sir.
Yes, sir.
Sorry, Number One. With little information on this planet, we'll have to leave the ship's most experienced officer here covering us.
There's no indication of problems down there, but let's not take chances.
Yes, sir. There's a canyon to the left. We can set you there completely unobserved.
Right.
Sir.
Captain Christopher Pike, United Space Ship Enterprise.
Doctor Theodore Haskins, American Continent lnstitute.
The same old Earth, and you'll see it very soon.
And you won't believe how fast you can get back. Well the time barrier's been broken. Our new ships can
This is Vina. Her parents are dead. She was born almost as we crashed.
(as the survivors pack up the settlement) Enterprise.
We'll begin transporting the survivors and their effects up to you very shortly.
Yes, affirmative on the
You appear to be healthy and intelligent, Captain. A prime specimen.
Er, affirmative on request. Landing party out.
You must forgive her choice of words, Captain. She's lived her whole life with a collection of aging scientists.
If they can, er, spare you a moment, I'd like to make my medical report.
I think it's time to show the Captain our secret.
Their health is excellent, almost too good.
There's a reason for our condition, but we've had some doubt if Earth is ready to learn the secret. Let the girl show you. We'll accept your judgment.
You're tired, but don't worry. You'll feel much better soon. Don't you see it? Here and here.
I, I don't understand.
You will. You're a perfect choice.
Captain! (everyone rushes over in time to see the door closing in the rock. They fire their phasers at it to no avail.
Spock here.
There is no survivors' encampment, Number One. This is all some sort of trap. We've lost the Captain. Do you read?
What is it?
It's for Commodore Mendez.
Plead signal for you, sir. Go ahead, Uhura.
Commodore Mendez, urgent. Subspace monitors show Enterprise receiving transmissions from planet Talos Four in violation of Starfleet General Orders.
Receiving transmissions from Talos Four? Then the images we've been seeing are
Are coming from Talos Four, sir.
Captain Kirk is here by relieved. You are ordered to assume command of the Enterprise. Disable vessel if necessary to prevent further contact. Message signed ComSol, Starfleet Command.
Mister Spock, you're aware of the orders regarding any contact with Talos Four. You have deliberately invited the death penalty. You've not only finished yourself, Spock, but you've finished your Captain as well.
The Commodore must be aware that Captain Kirk knew nothing of this.
And you're aware a Captain is responsible for everything that occurs on his ship. I order you to return this vessel back to manual control.
Sir, I respectfully decline.
Very well. You've earned the consequences. This court is in recess.
Do you know what you're doing? Have you lost your mind?
Captain, Jim, please don't stop me. Don't let him stop me. It's your career and Captain Pike's life. You must see the rest of the transmission.
Lock him up.
The Menagerie Part 2
How do you plead to the charge of unlawfully taking command?
Guilty.
Of sabotaging the computers of this vessel and locking it on a course for planet Talos Four?
Guilty.
And of forcibly attempting to transport Captain Pike to that planet?
Guilty.
Why? Why does Spock want to take to that forbidden world his former captain. Mutilated by a recent space disaster, now a shell of a man, unable to speak or move? The only answer Spock would give was on the hearing-room screen. How Spock could do this he refused to explain, but there before our eyes, actual images from thirteen years ago of Captain Pike as he was when he commanded this vessel, of Spock in those days, and of how the Enterprise had become the first and only starship to visit Talos Four. They had received a distress signal from that planet and discovered there, still alive after many years, the survivors of a missing vessel, only to find it was all an illusion. No survivors, no encampment, it was all a trap set by a race of beings who could make a man believe he was seeing anything they wished him to see, and Captain Pike was gone, a prisoner for some unknown purpose.
And the images we've been seeing are
Are coming from Talos Four, sir.
Mister Spock, you're aware of the orders regarding any contact with Talos Four. You have deliberately invited the death penalty.
Do you know what you're doing? Have you lost your mind?
Captain, Jim, please. Don't stop me. Don't let him stop me. It's your career and Captain Pike's life. You must see the rest of the transmission.
The court-martial of Mister Spock has been convened in closed session. Despite all we can do, images continue to be transmitted to us from Talos Four.
Starfleet has ordered no contact with Talos Four. They made no exceptions.
You have no choice, sir. I'm sorry. The Keeper has taken over control of our screen. Do you understand, sir? (flash) As you saw before, Captain Pike had been knocked unconscious and captured by the Talosians.
Can you hear me? My name is Christopher Pike, commander of the space vehicle Enterprise from a stellar group at the other end of this galaxy. Our intentions are peaceful. Can you understand me?
It appears, Magistrate, that the intelligence of the specimen is shockingly limited.
This is no surprise since his vessel was baited here so easily with a simulated message. As you can read in its thoughts, it is only now beginning to suspect that the survivors and encampment were a simple illusion we placed in their minds.
You're not speaking, yet I hear you.
You will note the confusion as it reads our thought transmissions.
All right, then, telepathy. You can read my mind. I can read yours. Now, unless you want my ship to consider capturing me an unfriendly act
You now see the primitive fear/threat reaction. The specimen is about to boast of his strength, the weaponry of his vessel, and so on. Next, frustrated into a need to display physical prowess, the creature will throw himself against the transparency.
If you were in here, wouldn't you test the strength of these walls, too? There's a way out of any cage, and I'll find it.
Despite its frustration, the creature appears more adaptable than our specimens from other planets. We can soon begin the experiment.
The inhabitants of this planet must live deep underground, probably manufacture food and other needs down there. Our tests indicate the planet surface, without considerably more vegetation or some animals, simply too barren to support life.
Exactly. An illusion placed in our minds by this planet's inhabitants.
It was a perfect illusion. They had us seeing just what we wanted to see, human beings who'd survived with dignity and bravery, everything entirely logical, right down to the building of the camp, the tattered clothing, everything. Now let's be sure we understand the danger of this. The inhabitants of this planet can read our minds, they can create illusions out of a person's own thoughts, memories, and experiences, even out of a person's own desires. Illusions just as real and solid as this table top and just as impossible to ignore.
It's Captain Pike they've got. He needs help.
If we start buzzing about down there, we're liable to find their mental power's so great they could reach out and swat this ship as though it were a fly.
Now that entry may have stood up against hand lasers but we can transmit the ship's power against it, enough to blast half a continent.
Thousands of us are already probing the creature's thoughts, Magistrate. We find excellent memory capacity.
I read most strongly a recent death struggle in which it fought to protect its life. We will begin with this, giving the specimen something more interesting to protect.
Come on, we must hide ourselves. Come, come, hurry. It's deserted. There'll be weapons and perhaps food.
This is Rigel Seven.
Please, we must hide ourselves.
I was in a cage, a cell, in some kind of a zoo. I must still be there.
Come on.
They've reached into my mind and taken the memory of somewhere I've been.
The Kaylar!
It's starting just as it happened two weeks ago, except for you.
A brilliant deduction by Captain Pike, gentlemen. Yes, he was still inside his cell, but knowing that couldn't help him.
The Talosians controlled his brain.
And could make him live any place, any time, any situation they wished. He would see, taste, suffer with the same reality as you gentlemen sitting there.
Longer hair, different dress, but it is you, the one the survivors call Vina. Or rather the image of Vina. But why you again? Why didn't they create a different girl?
Quick. If you attack while it's not looking.
But it's only a dream.
You have to kill him as you did here before.
You can tell my jailers I won't go along with it. I'm not an animal performing for its supper.
It doesn't matter what you call this, you'll feel it. That's what matters. You'll feel every moment of what happens to you.
It's over. (she hugs her hero, then sees the Talosians)
What is it? Why have they stopped the images?
Because they know that Captain Pike is fatigued. We can reconvene later.
Then they care about the Captain.
They want him back alive, sir.
I demand to know why.
If you'll be patient, the answers to your questions
You're forgetting you're on trial, Spock. You will answer all questions put to you.
My answer to your question would be quite unbelievable, sir. I regret we'll have to wait and see it there.
Why are you here?
To please you.
Are you real?
As real as you wish.
No, no. No, that's not an answer. I've never met you before, never even imagined you.
Perhaps they made me out of dreams you've forgotten.
What, and dress you in the same metal fabric they wear?
I can wear whatever you wish, be anything you wish.
So they can see how their specimen performs? They want to see how I react, is that it?
Don't you have a, a dream, something you've always wanted very badly?
Or do they do more than just watch me? Do they feel with me, too?
You can have whatever dream you want. I can become anything, any woman you, you've ever imagined. You can have anything you want in the whole universe. Let me please you.
Yes. Yes, you can please me. You can tell me about them. Is there any way I can keep them from probing my mind, from using my thoughts against me? Does that frighten you? Does that mean there is a way?
You're a fool.
Since you're not real, there's not much point in continuing this conversation, is there?
Standing by, Number One.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Our circuits are beginning to heat. We'll have to cease power.
Maybe it was. It's what I tried to explain in the briefing room. Their power of illusion is so great, we can't be sure of anything we do, anything we see.
Perhaps if you asked me some questions I could answer.
How far can they control my mind?
If I tell you, then will you pick some dream you've had and let me live it with you?
Perhaps.
They can't actually make you do anything you don't want to do.
But they try to trick me with their illusions.
And, er, they can punish you when you're not co-operative. You'll find out about that.
Did they ever live on the surface of this planet? Why did they go underground?
War, thousands of centuries ago.
That's why it's so barren up there?
So the Talosians who came underground found life limited here and they concentrated on developing their mental power.
But they found it's a trap, like a narcotic, because when dreams become more important than reality, you give up travel, building, creating. You even forget how to repair the machines left behind by your ancestors. You just sit, living and reliving other lives left behind in the thought record.
Or sit probing minds of zoo specimens like me.
You're better than a theatre to them. They create the illusion for you, they watch you react, feel your emotions. They have a whole collection of specimens, descendants of life brought back long ago from all over this part of the galaxy.
Which means they had to have more than one of each animal.
Please.
They'll need a pair of humans too. Where do they get intend to get the Earth woman?
You said that if I answered questions
But that was a bargain with something that didn't exist. You said you weren't real, remember?
I'm a woman as real and as human as you are. We are like Adam and Eve. If we. No, please, no! Don't punish me! I'll die! (disappears)
An Earth woman? Then you were captured as breeding stock. (flash)
Why? Just to maintain a supply of zoo specimens?
Much more, Captain.
The vial contains a nourishing protein complex.
Is the keeper actually communicating with one of his animals?
If the form and the colour is not appealing, it can appear as any food you wish to visualise.
And if I prefer
To starve? You overlook the unpleasant alternative of punishment.
From a fable you once heard in childhood. You will now consume the nourishment.
Why not just put irresistible hunger in my mind? Because you can't, can you? You do have limitations, don't you?
If you continue to disobey, from deeper in your mind, there are things even more unpleasant.
That's very interesting.
Now to the female.
You were startled. Weren't you reading my mind then?
As you've conjectured, an Earth vessel did crash on our planet, but with only a single survivor.
No, let's stay on the first subject. All I wanted for that moment was to get my hands around your neck.
We repaired the survivor's injuries and found the species interesting.
Do primitive thoughts put up a block you can't read through?
It became necessary to attract a mate.
All right, all right. Let's talk about the girl. You seem to be going out of your way to make her attractive, to make me feel protective.
Seems more important to you now that I begin to accept her and like her.
We wish our specimens to be happy in their new life.
Assuming that's a lie, why would you want me attracted to her? So I'll feel love in a husband-wife relationship? That would be necessary only if you intend to build a family group or perhaps a whole human community.
With the female now properly conditioned.
You mean properly punished! I'm the one who's not cooperating! Why don't you punish me?
First, an emotion of protectiveness. Now one of sympathy. Excellent.
You want some coffee, dear? I left the thermos hooked to my saddle.
Tango! You old devil, you. Uh, I'm sorry I don't have any sugar. Well, they think of everything, don't they? (feeds lumps to the horse)
Is it good to be home?
They read our minds very well. Home, anything else I want if I co-operate, is that it?
My, it turned out to be a lovely day, didn't it? You're home. You can even stay if you want.
But we're not here, neither of us. We're in a menagerie, a cage!
No.
Stop it. Don't you care what they'll do to us?
Back in my cage, it seemed for a couple of minutes that our keeper couldn't read my thoughts. Do emotions like hate, keeping hate in your mind, does that block off our mind from them?
Yes. They can't read through primitive emotions, but you can't keep it up for long enough. I've tried. They keep at you and at you year after year, tricking and punishing, and they won. They own me. I know you must hate me for that.
Oh, no. I don't hate you. I can guess what it was like.
But that's not enough. Don't you see? They read my thoughts, my feelings, my dreams of what would be a perfect man. That's why they picked you. I can't help but love you and they expect you to feel the same way.
If they can read my mind, then they know I'm attracted to you. I was from the very first moment I saw you in the survivor's camp. You were like a wild little animal.
Vina?
That's Vina again, as the green Orion slave girl? (flash)
They're like animals, vicious, seductive. They say no human male can resist them.
Strange evidence from the past, how the Talosians, planning to breed a society of human slaves, tempted Captain Pike with the Earth woman they held in captivity. And as she appeared to him in many forms, each more exciting than the last, Pike was beginning to weaken.
If our measurements and readings are an illusion also, one could find oneself materialised inside solid rock.
The women!
No! Let me finish!
We were the only ones transported.
It's not fair. You don't need them.
(grabbing the phase pistols) They don't work.
Don't say anything. I'm filling my mind with a picture of beating their huge, misshapen heads to pulp, thoughts so primitive they black out everything else. I'm filling my mind with hate.
How long can you block your thoughts? A few minutes, an hour? How can that help?
Leave him alone.
He doesn't need you. He's already picked me.
Picked her? For what? I don't understand.
Now, there's a fine choice for intelligent offspring.
Offspring, as in children?
You're no better choice. They'd have more luck crossing him with a computer.
It's not fair. I did what you asked.
Since you resist the present specimen, you now have a selection.
I'll break out of this zoo somehow and get to you. Is your blood red like ours? I'm going to find out.
Each of the two new specimens has qualities in her favour. The female you call Number One has the superior mind and would produce highly intelligent children.
All I want to do is get my hands on you. Can you read these thoughts, images of hate, killing?
The other new arrival has considered you unreachable but now is realising this has changed. The factors in her favour are youth and strength, plus unusually strong female drives.
You'll find my thoughts more interesting, thoughts so primitive you can't understand. Emotions so (stricken by pain)
Wrong thinking is punishable. Right thinking will be as quickly rewarded. You will find it an effective combination. (leaves)
No. No, don't help me. I have to concentrate. They can't read through hate.
Hold still, or I'll break your neck.
Don't hurt them. They don't mean to be evil.
I've had some samples of how good they are.
You stop this illusion, or I'll twist your head off. All right, now you try one more illusion, you try anything at all, and I'll break your neck.
Your ship. Release me, or we'll destroy it.
He's not bluffing, Captain. With illusion they can make your crew work the wrong controls or push any button it takes to destroy your ship.
I'm going to gamble you're too intelligent to kill for no reason at all. (hands him over to Number One and picks up the laser pistols, firing them at the glass wall) On the other hand, I've got a reason. I'm willing to bet you've created an illusion this laser is empty. I think it just blasted a hole in that window and you're keep us from seeing it. You want me to test my theory out on your head?
Captain. (there is a hole in the glass, and they all leave through it)
It seems the Talosians have deserted you.
Gentlemen, a moment, please.
Well, Mister Spock?
(to Pike) May I have your verdict?
Signal you want them to wait. Captain, please. It's your life now, at least a chance for life.
You keep talking about life, Mister Spock. A chance for life. How? As a prisoner, caged, a zoo specimen, living the illusions that amuse his keepers?
No, Captain. there's more to it. Watch. (the screen remains blank)
Guilty, yes or no, Captain? (flash) Yes. I must also vote guilty as charged. And you, Captain?
Guilty as charged.
Bridge to Commander.
Mendez here.
Sir, we're entering orbit Talos Four.
Talos controls the vessel now, sir, as they did thirteen years ago. You've asked me why. You'll see the answer now.
Make contact, Number One.
As you see, your attempt to escape accomplished nothing.
I want to contact our ship.
You are now on the surface where we wished you to be. With the female of your choice, you will now begin carefully guided lives.
And start by burying you?
That is your choice. To help you reclaim the planet's surface, our zoological gardens will furnish a variety of plant life.
Look, I'll make a deal with you. You and your life for the lives of these two Earth women. You give me proof that our ship is all right, send these two back, and I'll stay with Vina.
Is this a deception? Do you intend to destroy yourselves?
What is that?
The weapon is building up an overload, a force chamber explosion. You still have time to get underground. Well, go on! (pushes Vina away) Just to show you how primitive humans are, Talosian, you go with her.
If, if you all think it's this important, then I can't go, either. I suppose if they have one human being, they might try again. (more Talosians arrive)
Wait.
Their method of storing records is crude and consumed much time. Are you prepared to assimilate it?
We had not believed this possible. The customs and history of your race show a unique hatred of captivity. Even when it's pleasant and benevolent, you prefer death. This makes you too violent and dangerous a species for our needs.
He means that they can't use you. You're free to go back to the ship.
And that's it. No apologies. You captured one of us, threatened all of us.
Your unsuitability has condemned the Talosian race to eventual death. Is this not sufficient?
No other specimen has shown your adaptability. You were our last hope.
But wouldn't some form of trade, mutual cooperation.
Your race would learn our power of illusion and destroy itself, too.
Let's get back to the ship.
I can't. I can't go with you.
Sir, it just came on. We can't shut the power off.
Mister Spock here.
All power has come on, Mister Spock. The helm is answering to control.
You see why I can't go with you.
This is the female's true appearance.
They found me in the wreckage, dying, a lump of flesh. They rebuilt me. Everything works, but they had never seen a human. They had no guide for putting me back together.
It was necessary to convince you her desire to stay is an honest one.
You'll give her back her illusion of beauty?
And more.
Mister Spock, the system is coming on again.
What's happened to Vina?
No. No, and I agreed with her reasons.
All decks prepare for hyperdrive.
Engage.
Commodore, don't you think that (Mendez disappears)
What you now seem to hear, Captain Kirk, are my thought transmissions. The Commodore was never aboard your vessel. His presence there and in the shuttlecraft was an illusion. Mister Spock had related to us your strength of will. It was thought the fiction of a court-martial would divert you from too soon regaining control of your vessel. Captain Pike is welcome to spend the rest of his life with us, unfettered by his physical body. The decision is yours and his.
Mister Spock, even if regulations are explicit, you could have come to me and explained.
Ask you to face the death penalty, too? One of us was enough, Captain.
Yes.
Message from Starbase Eleven, sir. Received images from Talos Four. In view of historic importance of Captain Pike in space exploration, General Order Seven prohibiting contact Talos Four is suspended this occasion. No action contemplated against Spock. Proceed as you think best. Signed, Mendez, J.I., Commodore, Starbase Eleven.
Chris, do you want to go there? (flash) Mister Spock, would you care to take Captain Pike to the transporter room, see him off?
Thank you, sir, for both of us. (flash)
Er, Mister Spock, when you're finished, please come back and see me. I want to talk to you. This regret table tendency you've been showing lately towards flagrant emotionalism
I see no reason to insult me, sir. I believe I've been completely logical about the whole affair.
Captain Pike has an illusion, and you have reality. May you find your way as pleasant.
The Conscience of the King
Interesting. An Arcturian Macbeth.
(a man with an eyepatch) Watch him. Watch Macbeth.
(as Lady M) Is he dead? Speak. Is King Duncan dead?
Will all great Neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hands.
That voice. He's back. That man on the stage. I'm certain of it. That's Kodos the Executioner.
Pluck out mine eyes!
You mean to tell me you've called me three light years off my course just to accuse an actor of being Kodos?
He is Kodos. I'm sure of it.
You said you discovered a new food concentrate. What am I supposed to put in my log, that you lied? That you diverted a starship with false information? You're not only in trouble, you've put me in trouble, too.
I did it to trap Kodos!
Kodos is dead.
Is he? Is anyone sure? A body burned beyond recognition?
Tom, the authorities closed the book on that case years ago.
Then let's reopen it. Jim, four thousand people were butchered.
Martha, you tell him.
I can't tell him anything, Jim. He's been like this since the company of actors arrived.
Kodos is dead. I'm satisfied of that.
Well, I'm not. I remember him. That voice. The bloody thing he did.
Jim, Jim, I need your help. There were only eight or nine of us who actually saw Kodos. I was one, you were another. If he's to be exposed,
He's dead.
Then it will be a ghost Martha and I receive in our home tonight. I invited the entire company to a cocktail party. I have to be sure.
And I have to get back to my ship and figure out how I'm going to enter all this in my log. Tom. Martha.
Library computer.
History files. Subject, former Governor Kodos of Tarsus Four, also known as Kodos the Executioner. After that, background on actor Anton Karidian.
Working. Kodos the Executioner, summary. Governor of Tarsus Four twenty Earth years ago. Invoked martial law. Slaughtered fifty percent of population Earth colony, that planet. Burned body found when Earth forces arrived. No positive identification. Case closed. Detailed information follows. On stardate 2794.7,
Stop. Information on Anton Karidian.
Director and star of travelling company of actors sponsored by galactic cultural exchange project, touring official installations last nine years. Has daughter, Lenore, nineteen years old,
Stop. Give comparative identification between actor Karidian and Governor Kodos.
No identification records available on actor Anton Karidian.
Give information on actor Karidian prior to Kodos' death.
No information available, Anton Karidian, prior to twenty years ago
Photograph Kodos. (an image of a red-haired man with a beard comes on the monitor) Photograph Karidian. (the grey-haired man with a small moustache) Now photograph both.
Mister Spock. You know Doctor Leighton, don't you? Would you say he's given to fantasy?
A good empirical research scientist. Steady, reputable, occasionally brilliant.
With a very long memory.
I have no information on that, Captain. We are ready to leave orbit.
We'll delay departure for a time. I'm beaming back down to the planet.
Where's Tom?
He went to town. He called. He's on his way back.
The others are on the patio.
I take it you're the welcoming committee. (referring to his glass) Is that for me?
Why not? I saw your performance today. May I extend my appreciation?
My father will be delighted, Mister. Mister?
Captain James Kirk, Starship Enterprise.
We are honoured.
I had hoped to meet your father, here, tonight, personally.
I'm sorry, Captain Kirk. He has a rigid rule about that. He never sees anyone personally, and he never attends parties.
An actor turning away his admirers? Very unusual.
Karidian is a most unusual man. You saw Macbeth. That was my father.
Then I'll talk to Lady Macbeth.
So. Captain of the Enterprise. Interesting.
So, Lady Macbeth. Interesting. What's your next move?
We play two performances at Benecia, if the AstraI Queen can get us there.
She's a good ship. (takes a glass from a passing tray) Thank you. You were very impressive as Lady Macbeth.
Thank you. And as Lenore Karidian?
Very impressive. Lenore. I'd like to see you again.
You mean professionally?
Not necessarily.
I think I'd like that. Unfortunately, we must keep a schedule.
You don't have a schedule now, do you?
You mean leave? But I've only just arrived.
And you hate to overstay a welcome.
Exactly.
Why not?
Good. I'll make our apologies to our hostess. I'll meet you outside.
No. Just thinking.
About what?
At the party, you were such a brash young man.
Now somehow different. Not a ship's Captain with all those people to be strong and confident in front of. You know, you're really very dear, aren't you? In some ways, very lonely.
It's Tom Leighton. He's dead.
At least he has peace now. He never really had that before. Oh, why was Tom killed if what he suspected wasn't true?
I don't know. I'll try and find out.
Oh, Jim. How I'll miss him. (bursts into tears and leaves)
Kirk to Enterprise.
Bridge here, Captain.
Put me through to Captain Jon Daily of the AstraI Queen on orbit station, and put it on scramble.
Captain Daily's on, sir.
Hi, Jim.
Can you do me a favour?
I owe you a dozen. Just ask.
Don't make your pick-up here.
You mean strand all those actors?
I'll pick them up. And if there's any trouble, it'll be my responsibility.
Will do. Anything else?
Just keep this between the two of us and accept my thanks. Over and out. Kirk to Enterprise.
Bridge here, Captain.
Transporter room, ready to beam up.
Ready to resume course, Captain.
I think we're due for a pick-up.
What kind? Personnel? Cargo?
Captain? A Miss Karidian has been transported aboard ship. She requests permission to see you.
Tell her to come up to the Bridge, Lieutenant.
Escort Miss Karidian to the Bridge.
How did you know this lady was coming aboard?
I'm the Captain.
Captain Kirk, I didn't think we'd be meeting again so soon.
You probably wouldn't believe me if I told you I arranged it.
No, but it's a delightful thought. Captain, I'm afraid we need your help. We've been stranded. It seems that our transportation has cancelled out on us.
Can't you make other arrangements?
Yes, but not in time. You see, our schedule is like a chain. One break and it all collapses.
It'd be a shame if that happened.
If ever we needed a Good Samaritan.
Well.
I appeal to you.
The regulations are very clear about taking on passengers.
I'll make a bargain with you, Captain.
What have you got to trade?
Special performance for the crew in exchange for a lift.
You make it sound very interesting. The crew has been on patrol for a long time. They could use a break in the monotony.
Then you'll do it?
You've got me backed into a corner. The men would never forgive me if I deprived them of your performance, and your presence.
Thank you, Captain. I'm eternally grateful. I'll get the company ready. This means so much to them.
Mister Spock, prepare to leave orbit as soon as the Karidian company is aboard the ship.
May I inquire as to our course, Captain?
Benecia Colony.
Benecia Colony is eight light years off our course.
If my memory needs refreshing, Mister Spock, I'll ask you for it. In the meantime, follow my orders.
Mister Spock, ETA the Benecia Colony.
We'll arrive stardate 2825.3, Captain, approximately fifteen hundred Benecia time.
Library computer.
Data on question submitted to personnel files.
Data being received. Kodos file of all survivors. There are nine actual eye witnesses who can identify Kodos.
Stop. Give list.
Kirk, J., presently Enterprise Captain, Leighton, T., Moulton, E., Riley, K., Eames, D.,
Stop. Is that star service Lieutenant Kevin Riley?
Affirmative. Riley, Kevin. Presently assigned U.S.S. Enterprise communications section.
Stop. Mister Spock.
Captain.
Lieutenant Kevin Riley in communications, I wish to have him transferred down to the engineering decks.
He came up from engineering, Captain.
I'm sending him back.
Any explanation? He's a fine young officer. He's bound to consider this transfer a disciplinary action.
I don't wish to discuss it, Mister Spock. Please follow my orders.
Mister Spock, the man on top walks a lonely street. The chain of command is often a noose.
Spare me your philosophical metaphors, Doctor. The Captain is acting strangely. I'm asking if you've noticed.
Negative. Did you know this is the first time in a week I've had time for a drop of the true? Would you care for a drink, Mister Spock?
My father's race was spared the dubious benefits of alcohol.
Now I know why they were conquered. What are you so worried about, anyway? I find Jim generally knows what he's doing.
It was illogical for him to bring those players aboard.
Illogical? Did you get a look at that Juliet? That's a pretty exciting creature. Of course your, personal chemistry would prevent you from seeing that. Did it ever occur to you that he simply might like the girl?
It occurred. I dismissed it.
You would.
Did you know that he suddenly transferred Lieutenant Riley to engineering?
Lots of things go on around here that I don't know, Mister Spock. Now, he's the Captain. He can transfer whoever he pleases. You can look that up in a hundred volumes of space regulations somewhere. All right? Come on, have a drink.
No, thank you.
You're welcome. But I will. And please, Mister Spock, if you won't join me, don't disapprove of me. At least not until you've tried it, huh?
This is the observation deck. That's the flight deck down there with the shuttle craft.
Interesting.
Isn't it?
Tell me, Captain Kirk.
Anything.
Did you order the soft lights especially for the occasion?
If I had ordered soft lights, I'd also have arranged for music and flowers. Unfortunately, it isn't so. On the Enterprise, we try to duplicate earth conditions of night and day as closely as possible.
Star light, star bright. I wish I may, I wish I might. Do you remember that, Captain?
It's very old.
Almost as old as the stars themselves. And this ship. All this power, surging and throbbing, yet under control. Are you like that, Captain? All this power at your command, yet the decisions that you have to make
Come from a very human source.
Are you, Captain? Human?
You can count on it.
Tell me about the women in your world, Captain.
I'd rather talk about you. You must have wanted to perform since you first saw your father act. When was that?
In the beginning.
Tell me about it.
That's not fair. You haven't answered my question about the women.
What would you like to know?
Has the machine changed them? Made them just people instead of women?
Worlds may change, galaxies disintegrate, but a woman always remains a woman.
All this and power too. The Caesar of the stars and the Cleopatra to worship him.
Library computer.
Full personal dossiers on the following names. Doctor Thomas Leighton, Anton Karidian, Lieutenant Kevin Riley, and Captain James T. Kirk.
Accomplished. Standing by.
Correlate. Check their past histories. Report any item, any past episode or experience they all have in common.
Affirmative.
I appreciate whatever concern you may have for the ship's company, Mister Spock,
I will continue, Doctor. According to our library banks, it started on the Earth colony of Tarsus Four, when the food supply was attacked by an exotic fungus and largely destroyed. There were over eight thousand colonists and virtually no food. And that was when Governor Kodos seized full power and declared emergency martial law.
I've heard of it.
You may not have heard it all. Kodos began to separate the colonists. Some would live, be rationed whatever food was left. The remainder would be immediately put to death. Apparently he had his own theories of eugenics.
Unfortunately, he wasn't the first.
Perhaps not. But he was certainly among the most ruthless, to decide arbitrarily who would survive and who would not, using his own personal standards, and then to implement his decision without mercy. Children watching their parents die. Whole families destroyed. Over four thousand people. They died quickly, without pain, but they died. Relief arrived, but too late to prevent the executions. And Kodos? There never was a positive identification of his body.
What has Karidian to do with it?
His history begins almost to the day where Kodos disappeared.
You think Jim suspects he's Kodos?
He'd better. There were nine eye witnesses who survived the massacre, who'd actually seen Kodos with their own eyes. Jim Kirk was one of them. With the exception of Riley and Captain Kirk, every other eye witness is dead. And my library computer shows that wherever they were, on Earth, on a colony, or aboard ship, the Karidian Company of Players was somewhere near when they died.
It's unbelievable.
Hey. Rec room. Somebody.
Talk to me.
Larry Matson here. Is that you, Riley?
What's up?
Not me. I am down. In the engineering room.
You've been a bad boy.
Maybe so. Whatever I've done, they're sure keeping it a secret from me.
Hey. Is that Uhura playing? Let me talk to her.
I think his heart is sore.
What can I do for you, Riley?
A song. Make it a love song. Just something to reassure me I'm not the only living thing left in the universe, huh?
Well, you're not, and I'll prove it to you.
Where my heart is
I'll be back, though it takes forever
Tomorrow a stop along the way
Then let the years go fading
Where my heart is
Where my heart is
How'd you like that, Riley?
Help me, please.
You've got to pull him through.
I'm not sure I can.
If he dies, the only one who'll be able to identify Kodos is the Captain. And he'll be the next target.
As of this date, lab report indicates presence of appreciable amount of tetralubisol, a highly volatile lubricant in use aboard ship.
Someone tried to poison him.
Tetralubisol us a milky substance. Someone could have gotten careless, made a mistake.
I don't believe that and neither do you. I want the Captain to see that report.
When I've finished logging it.
Now.
Come.
My report on Lieutenant Riley.
Will he make it?
He's got a good chance.
Can we predict the same for you, Captain?
All right, Mister Spock. Let's have it.
Lieutenant Riley was a witness. So were you.
All right.
Someone tried to kill him.
Could have been an accident.
You should be told the difference between empiricism and stubbornness, Doctor. I checked with the library computer, just as you did. I got the same information.
Aren't you getting a little out of line, Mister Spock? My personal business,
Is my personal business when it might interfere with the smooth operation of this ship.
You think that happened?
It could happen.
I don't like anyone meddling in my private affairs. Not even my second in command.
Jim, Spock's simply trying,
I know what he's doing, and I don't like it.
It's his job, and you know it.
And you also know that nothing is proven.
Even in this corner of the galaxy, Captain, two plus two equals four. Almost certainly an attempt will be made to kill you. Why do you invite death?
I'm not. I'm interested in justice.
Are you? Are you sure it's not vengeance?
No, I'm not sure. I wish I was. I've done things I've never done before. I've placed my command in jeopardy. From here on I've got to determine whether or not Karidian is Kodos.
He is.
You sound certain. I wish I could be. Before I accuse a man of that, I've got to be. I saw him once, twenty years ago. Men change. Memory changes. Look at him now, he's an actor. He can change his appearance. No. Logic is not enough. I've got to feel my way, make absolutely sure.
What if you decide he is Kodos? What then? Do you play God, carry his head through the corridors in triumph? That won't bring back the dead, Jim.
No, but they may rest easier.
Logic, Captain. Doctor Leighton was murdered while the Karidian Company was on Planet Q. Now an attempt has been made against Riley while the company is on board the Enterprise.
Doc isn't sure it was a murder attempt. Besides, I have an idea may prove
Shh. Listen. Do you hear it? That low hum.
A phaser.
On overload. (starts searching)
This is the Captain. There's a phaser on overload in my quarters. If it blows, it'll take out the entire deck. Evacuate all personnel in this quadrant. Double Red Alert. (now starts searching himself) You get out of here.
You can't stay.
Go on. Block off this section. Hurry. I'll find it.
Evacuate this section. Seal it off. Clear section C4 and C5.
(barging in without knocking) We're overdue for our talk, aren't we?
I hoped you would have respected my privacy, Captain.
A moment ago, we narrowly averted an explosion which would have destroyed several decks of this ship. Before that, someone tried to poison one of my crewmen.
I am sorry to hear that.
I'm sure you are. Are you Kodos? I asked you a question.
Do you believe that I am?
I do.
Then I am Kodos, if it pleases you to believe so. I am an actor. I play many parts.
You're an actor now. What were you twenty years ago?
Younger, Captain. Much younger.
So was I. But I remember. Let's see if you do. Read this into that communicator on the wall. It will be recorded and compared to a piece of Kodos' voice film we have in our files. The test is virtually infallible. It will tell us whether you're Karidian, or Kodos the Executioner. (switches on comm.) Ready for voice test. Disguising your voice will make no difference.
(reading) The revolution is successful, but survival depends on drastic measures. Your continued existence represents a threat to the well-being of society. (stops looking at the paper) Your lives means slow death to the more valued members of the colony. Therefore I have no alternative but to sentence you to death. Your execution is so ordered. Signed, Kodos, governor of Tarsus Four.
I remember the words. I wrote them down. You said them like you knew them. You hardly glanced at the paper.
I learn my parts very quickly.
Are you sure? Are you sure you didn't act this role out in front of a captive audience whom you blasted out of existence without mercy?
I find your use of the word mercy strangely inappropriate, Captain. Here you stand, the perfect symbol of our technical society. Mechanised, electronicised, and not very human. You've done away with humanity, the striving of man to achieve greatness through his own resources.
We've armed man with tools. The striving for greatness continues. But Kodos
Kodos, whoever he was
Or is.
Or is. Kodos made a decision of life and death. Some had to die that others might live. You're a man of decision, Captain. You ought to understand that.
All I understand is that four thousand people were needlessly butchered.
In order to save four thousand others. And if the supply ships hadn't come earlier than expected, this Kodos of yours might have gone down in history as a great hero.
But he didn't. And history has made its judgment.
If you're so sure that I'm Kodos, why not kill me now? Let bloody vengeance take its final course! And see what difference it makes to this universe of yours.
Those beautiful words, well acted, change nothing.
I suppose not. They're merely tools, like this ship of yours.
There are no previous records to Anton Karidian prior to twenty years ago.
Blood thins. The body fails. One is finally grateful for a failing memory. I no longer treasure life, not even my own. I am tired! And the past is a blank. Did you get everything you, wanted, Captain Kirk?
If I had gotten everything I wanted, you might not walk out of this room alive.
Captain Kirk.
(to Karidian) You'd better rest now. There's a stain of cruelty on your shining armour, Captain. You could have spared him, and me. You talked of using tools. I was a tool, wasn't l? A tool to use against my father.
In the beginning perhaps. But later, I wanted it to be more than that.
Later. Everything's always later. Later. Latest. Too late. Too late, Captain. You are like your ship, powerful, and not human. There is no mercy in you.
If he is Kodos, then I've shown him more mercy than he deserves. And if he isn't, then we'll let you off at Benecia, and no harm done.
Captain Kirk. Who are you to say what harm was done?
Who do I have to be?
Medical log. Lieutenant Riley's sufficiently recovered to be discharged, but the Captain's ordered him restricted to Sickbay to prevent contact with the passenger who calls himself Karidian and who's suspected of being Kodos the Executioner and of murdering the Lieutenant's family.
(on stage) Tonight, the Karidian Players present Hamlet, another in a series of living plays presented in space, dedicated to the tradition of classic theatre. Hamlet is a violent play about violent times when life was cheap and ambition was God.
I believe we have a match, Captain.
But not an exact match, Mister Spock. We're dealing with a man's life. No machine can make that decision.
In the long history of medicine, no doctor has ever caught the first few minutes of a play. Riley, don't forget to
Riley? Captain Kirk, McCoy here.
Yes, Doctor.
Riley's gone. I was recording my log about Karidian and Kodos. If he overheard
You've made your point, Doctor.
Captain? Security, H deck, The weapons locker has been broken into. One phaser is missing.
This is the Captain. Security two alert. Find and restrain Lieutenant Kevin Riley. He's armed and possibly headed towards the ship's theatre.
Whither wilt thou lead me? Speak, I'll go no further.
I will.
My hour is almost come, when I to sulphurous and tormenting fires must render up myself.
Speak. I am bound to hear.
So art thou to revenge, when thou shalt hear. I am thy father's spirit, doomed for a certain term to walk the night,
Riley, get back to the Sickbay.
He murdered my father, and my mother.
You could be wrong. Don't throw away your life on a mistake.
I'm not wrong.
But that I am forbid to tell the secrets of my prison house,
I know that voice, that face, I know it. I saw it. He murdered them.
Thy soul, freeze thy young blood.
It's an order. Give me the weapon.
Now get back to Sickbay. Go on.
It's going beautifully. What is it? What's wrong?
There was a voice out of the past haunting me, torturing me. There was another part I once played long ago. I never told you about it. Now that same curtain rises again. The time has come.
No, Father. The time will never come. Tonight, after my performance, the last two who can harm you will be gone.
What are you saying?
There were nine. Now there are only two, and they will be gone as soon as I. Don't look at me like that.
What have you done?
What had to be done. They had to be silenced.
All of them? All seven? More blood on my hands?
No Father, not anymore. I'm strong, Father. It's nothing.
We'll be ready. Don't you see? All the ghosts are dead. I've buried them. There's no more blood on your hands.
Oh, my child, my child. You've left me nothing! You were the one thing in my life untouched by what I'd done.
But you're safe now, Father. I've saved you. Now, no one can touch you. Not even Captain Kirk. See Caesar come? He's awed by your greatness, your shining brightness. Bright as a blade before it is stained with blood.
Bright as a blade. Come with me, both of you.
Of course. After the play.
The play is over. It's been over for twenty years.
I was a soldier in a cause. There were things to be done, terrible things.
Stop it, Father! You have nothing to justify.
Murder, flight, suicide, madness. I never wanted the blood on my hands ever to stain you.
I did it for you. I've saved you.
By killing seven innocent men.
They weren't innocent! They were dangerous! I would have killed a world to save him!
The play, Captain. He must go on. This is the great Karidian.
Guard.
You cannot deny him his last performance!
Lenore, don't!
You'll never get off the ship.
It will become a floating tomb, drifting through space with the soul of the great Karidian giving performances at every star he touches. (Kirk moves towards her) I know how to use this, Captain.
No.
Caesar, beware the ides of March.
No, child! Don't!
Father. Father! O, proud, death! What feast is toward in thine eternal cell, that thou, such a prince at a shot so bloodily hast struck? The curtain, the curtain rises. It rises. There's no time to sleep. The play. The play. The play's the thing, wherein we'll catch the conscience of the king.
Medical report. (hands it over) She'll receive the best of care, Jim. She remembers nothing. She even thinks her father's still alive giving performances before cheering crowds. You really cared for her, didn't you?
Ready to leave Benecia orbit, Captain.
Stand by, Mister Leslie. All channels cleared, Uhura?
All channels clear, sir.
Whenever you're ready, Mister Leslie.
Leaving orbit, sir.
You're not going to answer my question, are you?
Ahead warp factor one, Mister Leslie.
That's an answer.
Balance of Terror
The ceremony will be carried on all viewing screens, sir.
Good.
There was a call for you from the Bridge.
Kirk here.
Still no answer from Earth Outpost number two, Captain, and now number three's gone silent.
Maintain course to outpost four. Keep me informed. Kirk out.
Since the days of the first wooden vessels, all shipmasters have had one happy privilege. That of uniting two people in the bonds of matrimony. We are gathered here today with you, Angela Martine, and you, Robert Tomlinson, in the sight of your fellows, in accordance with our laws and our many beliefs so that you may pledge your
Alert! Alert! All decks alert! Alert! Alert! Captain to the Bridge. All decks alert.
Kirk here.
Earth Outpost four reports they're under attack. A space vessel, identity unknown.
Full ahead. All decks, condition red.
All decks, condition red. All decks, condition red.
Outpost 4 reported under attack, sir. Then message terminates.
Verified, Captain.
Our speed is now maximum, sir.
Position, eight minutes from Outpost four at this velocity, sir.
Scotty.
I've talked to my engine room, sir. We'll get more speed out of her.
Did Outpost 4 give anything at all on the attacking vessel, Lieutenant?
No identification, sir.
There can't be much doubt who's attacking, sir.
Mister Spock, put this star sector on our screen. Now show our position. Signal this to all decks, Lieutenant.
All decks standing by, sir.
This is the Captain speaking. In our next action, we can risk neither miscalculation nor error
By any man aboard. Listen carefully. Science Officer.
Referring to the map on your screens, you will note beyond the moving position of our vessel, a line of Earth outpost stations. Constructed on asteroids, they monitor the Neutral Zone established by treaty after the Earth-Romulan conflict a century ago.
As you may recall from your histories, this conflict was fought,
By our standards today, with primitive atomic weapons and in primitive space vessels
Which allowed no quarter, no captives. Nor was there even ship-to-ship visual communication. Therefore, no human, Romulan, or ally has ever seen the other. Earth believes the Romulans to be warlike, cruel, treacherous, and only the Romulans know what they think of Earth. The treaty, set by sub-space radio, established this Neutral Zone, entry into which by either side, would constitute an act of war. The treaty has been unbroken since that time. Captain.
What you do not know and must be told is that my command orders on this subject are precise and inviolable. No act, no provocation
Will be considered sufficient reason to violate the zone. We may defend ourselves,
But if necessary to avoid interspace war,
Both these outposts and this vessel will be considered expendable. Captain out.
We know Outpost four has been attacked, sir, so if we intercept Romulans now
After a whole century, what will a Romulan ship look like, Mister Stiles? I doubt they'll radio and identify themselves.
You'll know, sir. They're painted like a giant bird-of-prey.
I had no idea that history was your specialty.
Family history. There was a Captain Stiles was in the space service then. Two Commanders and several junior officers. All lost in that war, sir.
Their war, Mister Stiles. Not yours. Don't forget it.
Yes, sir.
Outpost two coming into sensor range, Captain.
Outpost 2 was the first to go silent, Lieutenant?
Yes, Captain, then Outpost three an hour later.
Sweeping the area of Outpost two. Sensor reading indefinite. Double-checking Outpost three. I read dust and debris. Both Earth outposts gone, and the asteroids they were constructed on, pulverised.
Open a channel to our nearest command base. Quarter hour reports on our position and status.
Yes, sir.
Call battle stations, Mister Sulu.
Battle stations. All hands to battle stations. Battle stations. Battle stations. All decks acknowledge. All decks acknowledge, sir. All stations show green.
Energise main phasers, Mister Styles. All weapons to full power.
All weapons to full power. Phaser control room.
Energise. Acknowledge.
(the bride) Phaser control acknowledging. All weapons energising to full.
(the groom) Happy wedding day, almost.
You won't get off my hook this easily. I'm going to marry you, Mister, battle or phaser weapons notwithstanding.
Well, meanwhile, temporarily at least, I am still your superior officer. So get with it, Mister.
Acknowledge. All weapons batteries ready.
Outpost four now five minutes away, sir.
And showing on my sensors, Captain. At least it's still there.
Sir, regaining contact with Outpost four. Switching to speakers.
Outpost four. Do you read me, Enterprise? This is Commander Hansen.
Kirk here. We're minutes away, Hansen. What's your status?
Outposts two, three, and eight are gone. Unknown weapon. Completely destroyed, even though we were alerted. Had our deflector shield on maximum. Hit by enormous power. First attack blew our deflector shield. If they hit us again with our deflector shield gone. Do you read me, Enterprise?
Confirm what hit you, Hansen. What vessel? Identity?
Space vessel, only glimpse of.
Can you locate the intruder for us?
Negative. It seems to have disappeared somehow. I have you on my screen now. Switching to visual.
Tie us in.
Tied in, sir.
Enterprise, can you see it? My command post here. We're a mile deep on an asteroid. Almost solid iron. And even through our deflectors, it did this. Can you see?
Affirmative. You're visual, Hansen. What do you have on the intruder?
No identification. No answer to our challenge. Only a glimpse of it. Then they fired something at us, some form of high-energy plasma. Fantastic power. And then the whole vessel disappeared. But it's out there somewhere. Our sensors show that much. Enterprise, something coming on our viewing screen, coming at us fast.
Lock us onto your screen.
Switching. Can you see it, Enterprise? Can you see it? It's becoming visible in the centre of my screen.
Do you have phaser capacity? We're still out of range.
Negative. Phasers gone. Weapons crew dead.
Make a challenge. Warn that ship off.
Trying to, sir. They don't acknowledge.
Outpost four disintegrated, Captain.
Position of the intruder, Mister Spock.
Disappeared. Interesting how they became visible for just a moment.
Go to full magnification.
Screen is on full mag, sir.
I don't see anything. I can't understand it.
Invisibility is theoretically possible, Captain, with selective bending of light. But the power cost is enormous.
Continuing to challenge, sir. Still no response.
Discontinue. Contact remaining outposts. Have them signal us any sightings or sensor readings in their area.
Yes, sir.
Blip has changed its heading. And in a very leisurely manoeuvre. They may not be aware of us.
Their invisibility screen may work both ways. With that kind of power consumption, they may not be able to see us.
His heading is now one eleven mark fourteen. The exact heading a Romulan would take, Jim, for the Neutral Zone and home.
Parallel course.
Don't you mean interception course, sir?
Negative. You and Mister Sulu will match its course and speed with the object on our sensors exactly, move for move. If he has sensors, I want him to think we're a reflection, an echo. Under no circumstances are you to cross into the Neutral Zone without my direct orders.
Acknowledged, sir.
Cancel battle stations. All decks, standby alert.
Cancel battle stations.
Captain, may I respectfully remind the Captain what has happened? The Romulans have crossed the Neutral Zone, attacked our outposts, killed our men.
Mister Stiles.
Add to that the fact it was a sneak attack.
Mister Stiles, are you questioning my orders?
Negative, sir. I'm pointing our that we could have Romulan spies aboard this ship.
I agree, sir. Respectfully recommend all decks maintain security alert.
Very well. All decks, security alert.
Security alert, sir.
Picking up communication. It's from their ship.
Pipe it in.
Sounds like code, sir.
I have a fix on it, Captain. I believe I can lock on it, get a picture of their Bridge.
Put it on the screen.
Cryptography is working on it, sir.
Give it to Spock.
I didn't quite get that, Mister Stiles.
Nothing, sir.
Repeat it.
I was suggesting that Mister Spock could probably translate it for you, sir.
I assume you're complimenting Mister Spock on his ability to decode.
I'm not sure, sir.
Well, here's one thing you can be sure of, Mister. Leave any bigotry in your quarters. There's no room for it on the Bridge. Do I make myself clear?
You do, sir.
Transmission has been cut off. (to Spock) I made a tape of it, sir.
Very well. (runs the tape through his computer)
Something visual ahead, Captain, at extreme range. He's changing course, sir.
Stay with him, helm.
Turning, sir.
We grow visible. Attend the cloaking system.
It consumes much power, Commander. With no enemy to concern us.
That Earth outpost called to an Earth vessel. Now it follows us.
Which neither retreats nor grows nearer. It turns as we turn. Commander, it is our judgment we run from a reflection.
Perhaps so, but my judgment prevails.
Cloaking system on, sir.
It is good we approach the Neutral Zone. Not too soon for me to see the stars of home. I know they are following.
(an older man) If an Earth ship, why does he not attack?
First study the enemy, seek weakness. If I were their commander, that is what I would do.
My Commander sent for Decius.
A message was dispatched. You've broken the rule of silence.
Only in code, Commander. To inform our Praetor of this glorious mission.
Your carelessness might have ended this glorious mission. You're reduced two steps in rank. Return to post.
Take care, Commander. He has friends, and friends of his kind mean power. And power is danger.
Danger and I are old companions.
We've seen a hundred campaigns together, and still I do not understand you.
I think you do. No need to tell you what happens when we reach home with proof of the Earthmen's weakness. And we will have proof. The Earth commander will follow. He must. When he attacks, we will destroy him. Our gift to the homeland, another war.
If we are the strong, isn't this the signal for war?
Must it always be so? How many comrades have we lost in this way?
Our portion, Commander, is obedience.
Obedience. Duty. Death and more death. Soon even enough for the Praetor's taste. Centurion, I find myself wishing for destruction before we can return. Worry not. Like you, I am too well-trained in my duty to permit it. Continue evasive manoeuvres. Now, back to the first course.
They're turning, sir. We're staying with them.
Steady on one eleven mark fourteen. Back on their original course, Captain, toward the Neutral Zone.
What's our position, navigator?
We'll enter the Neutral Zone in less than an hour, sir. Assuming, of course, that we don't turn back.
We now have aboard debris from Outpost four, Captain.
Bring it to the briefing room. Are you ready, gentlemen?
From the outpost's protective shield. Cast rodinium. This is the hardest substance known to our science.
Lab theorises an enveloping energy plasma forcing an implosion.
Comments?
Obviously, their weaponry is superior to ours, and they have a practical invisibility screen.
You're discussing tactics. Do you realise what this really comes down to? Millions and millions of lives hanging on what this vessel does.
Or on what this vessel fails to do, Doctor.
Yes, well gentlemen, the question still remains. Can we engage them with a reasonable possibility of victory?
No question. Their power is simple impulse.
Meaning we can outrun them?
To be used in chasing them or retreating, sir?
Go ahead, Mister Styles. I called this session for opinions.
We have to attack immediately.
Explain.
They're still on our side of the Neutral Zone. There would be no doubt they broke the treaty.
Attack, without a visible target? How do we aim our phasers?
Aim with sensors. Not accurate, but if we blanket them
And hope for a lucky shot before they zero in on us?
And if we don't? Once back, they'll report that we saw their weapons and ran.
And if they could report they destroyed us?
These are Romulans! You run away from them and you guarantee war. They'll be back. Not just one ship but with everything they've got. You know that, Mister Science Officer. You've the expert on these people, always left out that one point. Why? I'm very interested in why.
Sit down, Mister.
I agree. Attack.
Are you suggesting we fight to prevent a fight?
Based on what? Memories of a war over a century ago? On theories about a people we've never even met face to face?
We know what they look like.
Yes, indeed we do, Mister Stiles. And if Romulans are an offshoot of my Vulcan blood, and I think this likely, then attack becomes even more imperative.
War is never imperative, Mister Spock.
It is for them, Doctor. Vulcan, like Earth, had its aggressive colonising period. Savage, even by Earth standards. And if Romulans retain this martial philosophy, then weakness is something we dare not show.
Do you want a galactic war on your conscience?
Captain to Bridge.
This is Uhura, Captain.
What's our position?
Course unchanged, sir. Estimating treaty boundary in twenty one minutes.
Are you continuing to broadcast tactical reports?
Affirmative, Captain.
And at this distance?
Approximately three hours before receiving a reply to our first message.
Thank you, Lieutenant. Check our course ahead, Mister Spock.
A comet, magnitude seven, dead ahead, and the intruder changing course toward it.
Comet Icarus four. Composition?
Quite ordinary. An ionised mass, a trail of frozen vapour particles.
And when an object passes through it, even an invisible object?
It leaves a visible trail.
Our chance, gentlemen. Prepare to attack. All hands, battle stations. I hope we won't need your services, Bones.
Amen to that. We're taking a big gamble, Jim.
Battle status?
All stations manned, Captain.
Phaser weapons energised. Set for proximity blast.
Intruder now bearing directly for comet's tail.
Plot his exact point of entry, Mister Stiles.
Computed. On the board, sir.
The moment he begins entering the comet's tail, he becomes visible. End run, gentlemen. We'll swing around the other side and catch him at that moment.
Acknowledged, Captain.
He's maintaining that bearing, Captain.
Let's get him, Mister Sulu.
How pleasing to the eye it is. Behold a marvel in the darkness.
You spoke of entrapment.
Its many particles will obscure their sensing device, Centurion.
We enter it, Commander.
Once fully obscured, we will turn suddenly back upon our adversary.
At last the screen is clear, Commander.
Clear?
Our reflection no longer follows us.
Escape manoeuvre one, quickly!
We're losing sensor contact, Captain.
Steady as she goes. Phaser crews ready?
Phaser crew signal ready, sir.
He'll only be visible for a moment. Stand by.
Sir, nothing in
At the last moment he must have guessed our move. Hard to starboard, helm!
Hard to starboard.
He did exactly what I would have done. I won't underestimate him again. Now, fire blind. Lay down a pattern.
Traverse pattern. All phasers fire.
Phaser one, fire.
Phaser one, fire.
Phaser two, fire.
Phaser two, fire.
Divert all power to weapons.
Phaser overload. Control circuit burnout.
It'll take time to correct, sir.
Captain, are they surrendering?
Full astern! Emergency warp speed!
Do we have emergency warp?
Full power, sir. It's still overtaking us. If we can get one phaser working, sir, one shot might detonate it.
Navigation?
Estimate it'll overtake us in two minutes, sir.
Phasers, Mister Spock?
Impossible, Captain.
Feed this to the space recorder and jettison immediately.
Captain, should I continue log entry?
Yeoman. Affirmative. Continue log entries.
Yes, sir.
Ten seconds to impact. Captain, It's dissipating, sir.
It must have a range limit.
Five, four, three, two, one. Impact!
Limited range.
Phasers operational, Captain. Intruder bearing one eleven mark fourteen.
Back to his old course.
He may think we're destroyed, Captain.
I wouldn't make that assumption. I don't think their Captain will either.
Intruder holding steady. Course one eleven mark fourteen.
Same as before, Mister Sulu. Stay with him.
Commander, the reflection returns.
Activate our cloak.
Commander, our fuel runs low.
Quickly!
The Earth vessel? Impossible.
It moves as we move.
Its commander is not one to repeat a mistake.
We'll enter the Neutral Zone in one minute, Captain.
Do we violate the treaty, Captain?
They did, Doctor.
Once inside, they can claim we did. A set-up. They want war, we furnish the provocation.
We're still on our side, Captain.
Let's get them while we are. Before we enter the Neutral Zone. Full ahead, Mister Sulu. Maximum warp.
Ahead, sir. Maximum.
Phasers, stand by.
Sir, at this distance?
We know their Achilles heel, Mister Stiles. Their weapon takes all their energy. They must become visible in order to launch it.
A phaser hit at this distance would be the wildest stroke of luck.
I'm aware of that, Mister Stiles. Are phasers ready?
Phasers show ready, sir.
Commander!
Evasive action. The Earth ship again.
Twenty seconds to Neutral Zone, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, inform Command base, In my opinion, no option. On my responsibility, we are proceeding into the Neutral Zone. Steady as we go, Mister Sulu. Continue firing.
Commander, they stay within range. I will tend to the centurion.
No need. The Centurion is dead.
Why don't we fire, Commander?
No. No, he's shrewd, this starship commander. He tries to make us waste energy. He has estimated we have only enough. It is time. All debris into disposal tubes.
Yes, Commander.
The body of the Centurion, too. Forgive me, my old friend, but I must use all my experience now to get home.
Motion sensor signal stopped.
Cease fire.
Debris scatter ahead, sir. We've hit him.
Vessel wreckage. Metal moulds, conduit, plastoform and a body, Captain. However.
However?
Insufficient mass, sir.
What?
Simple debris. Not a vessel, a trick.
Go to sensor probes.
Nothing, sir. No motion out there at all. We've lost them, Captain.
Captain, I must make further repairs on the transfer coil. It's giving out again.
All right, Mister Spock, work quietly.
Now twenty full cycles, Commander. Still no sign. I say he's been fooled. He must have gone on.
Shh. He is there, somewhere. I feel it.
Can I get you something from the galley, sir? Coffee, at least?
Thank you, Yeoman. Bring it to the Bridge. I'll be there in a moment.
Yes, sir.
I wish I were on a long sea voyage somewhere. Not too much deck tennis, no frantic dancing, and no responsibility. Why me? I look around that Bridge, and I see the men waiting for me to make the next move. And Bones, what if I'm wrong?
Captain, I
No, I don't really expect an answer.
But I've got one. Something I seldom say to a customer, Jim. In this galaxy, there's a mathematical probability of three million Earth-type planets. And in all of the universe, three million million galaxies like this. And in all of that, and perhaps more, only one of each of us. Don't destroy the one named Kirk.
What?
It's all right. It's all right.
A signal, Commander.
We have him. Move toward him.
Power on. Reverse course. He'll try to slip under us.
Lateral power, sir.
Coming around, sir.
Phasers, fire.
Phasers, fire.
How, Commander. How?
He's a sorcerer, that one. He reads the thoughts in my brain. Our fuel supply all but gone and he stays out of reach.
We are beaten. Can it be true? The Praetor's finest and proudest flagship beaten.
Perhaps we can yet save your Praetor's pride for him. More debris into the tubes. Decius, do we have the old-style nuclear warheads aboard?
Yes Commander, but only for self-destruction.
Place one with the debris. Proximity fuse.
Yes, Commander. At once.
More wreckage, sir, scattering across our path.
Cease fire.
Debris on our scanners.
Analysis, quickly.
Same type as before, sir, except, one metal-cased object!
Helm, hard over. Phasers, fire point-blank.
Phasers, fire!
Glorious. Glorious.
Now we go home.
They're at our mercy. Commander, I remind you of your duty.
Captain to Sickbay.
McCoy here.
Casualties?
Twenty two so far. Mainly radiation burns, mostly from the ship's outer areas. Could have been much, much worse, Captain.
Thank you, Doctor. (the lights come back on) Report, Mister Spock?
Nuclear device of some kind, sir. Our phasers detonated it less than one hundred metres away.
Ship damage?
Mainly overloads and circuit burnouts.
Weapons status?
We've only the forward phaser room, Captain.
Fully operable, Scotty?
Yes, sir. But Specialist Tomlinson is manning it alone. No standby crew available.
Sir, my first assignment was in weapons control.
Go. Lieutenant Uhura, take over navigation.
Yes, Captain.
We have engine power now, Captain, if you'd like to move off and make repairs.
Maybe we can pull them back to our side of the Neutral Zone. Hold our position. Play dead.
Still no sign of movement, Commander.
We've damaged ourselves. Our fuel reserve is gone.
And it is our duty to crush the Praetor's enemies.
I do not trust their Captain.
We are in the Neutral Zone. They will not enter. If you refuse, permit me the glory of the kill, Commander.
We will attack, but on my order.
Damage reports, Mister Stiles?
Negative.
Will you require assistance here?
This time, we'll handle things without your help, Vulcan.
Tomlinson!
Enemy vessel becoming visible, sir.
Forward phasers, stand by. (the Romulan becomes a clear image) Fire! Fire! Stiles, can you hear me? Fire!
Fire! Stiles, can you hear me? Fire!
Fire!
Stiles, can you hear me? Fire! Stiles!
Mister Sulu, prepare to move in on the Romulan vessel. Ship-to-ship, Uhura. Put this on the screen.
(still at the navigation station) Hailing frequencies open, sir.
Captain. Standing by to beam your survivors aboard our ship. Prepare to abandon your vessel.
No. No, that is not our way. I regret that we meet in this way. You and I are of a kind. In a different reality, I could have called you friend.
What purpose will it serve to die?
We are creatures of duty, Captain. I have lived my life by it. Just one more duty to perform.
Are you all right, Mister Spock?
Yes, very well, thank you, Captain.
And you, Stiles?
I'm alive, sir. But I wouldn't be. Mister Spock pulled me out of the phaser room. He saved my life. He risked his life after I
I saved a trained navigator so he could return to duty. I am capable of no other feelings in such matters.
How many men did we lose, Bones?
Only one. Tomlinson. The boy who was getting married this morning. His fiance is at the chapel.
We finally received an answer from Command base, sir. They say they'll support whatever decision you have to make.
It never makes any sense. We both have to know that there was a reason.
I'm all right.
Shore Leave
Anything from the landing party?
They should be sending up a report momentarily, Captain. (Kirk stretches and groans) Something wrong?
A kink in my back. (behind his back the Yeoman starts to massage it) That's it. A little higher, please. Push. Push hard. Dig it in there, Mister
Thank you, Yeoman. That's sufficient.
You need sleep, Captain. If it's not out of line
I have enough of that from Doctor McCoy, Yeoman. Thank you.
Doctor McCoy is correct, Captain. After what this ship has been through in the last three months, there is not a crewman aboard who is not in need of rest. Myself excepted, of course.
Have Doctor McCoy's report channeled to my quarters, Lieutenant.
Aye, aye, Captain.
Beautiful, beautiful. No animals, no people, no worries. Just what the doctor ordered. Right, Doctor?
I couldn't have prescribed better. We are one weary ship.
Do you think the Captain will authorise shore leave here?
Depending upon my report and that of the other scouting parties. You know, you have to see this place to believe it. It's like something out of Alice in Wonderland. The Captain has to come down.
He'd like it.
He needs it. You've got your problems, I've got mine. He's got ours, plus his, plus four hundred and thirty other people's. Where are you going?
To get some cell-structure records. A blade of grass, a bush, a tree, a flower petal. With these, we can tell the whole planet's biology.
Sulu!
What is it? What's the matter?
Did you see them?
See what? I don't see anything. What is it, Doc?
Captain's log. Stardate 3025 er, point 3. We are orbiting an uninhabited planet in the Omicron Delta region. A planet remarkably like Earth, or how we remember Earth to be. Park-like, beautiful, green, flowers, trees, green lawn, quiet and restful. Almost too good to be true.
Sir, I don't see your name in any of the shore parties.
I may be tired, Yeoman, but I'm not falling apart. Dismissed.
Aye, aye, sir.
Mister Spock, we're beaming down the starboard section first. Which section would you like to go with?
Not necessary in my case, Captain. On my planet, to rest is to rest, to cease using energy. To me, it is quite illogical to run up and down on green grass using energy instead of saving it.
Kirk here.
Doctor McCoy calling from the planet, Captain.
Yes. Open a channel, Uhura.
Aye, aye, sir.
Captain, are you beaming down?
I hadn't planned to, Bones. Why?
Well, either our scouting probes and detectors are malfunctioning, and all us scouts careless and beauty-intoxicated, or I must report myself unfit for duty.
Explain.
On this supposedly uninhabited planet, I just saw a large rabbit
Pull a gold watch from his vest and claim that he was late.
That's pretty good. I got one for you. The rabbit was followed by a little blonde girl, right?
As a matter of fact, yes.
And they disappeared through a hole in a hedge.
All right, Doctor, I'll take your report under consideration. Captain out. That's a McCoy pill, with a little mystery sugar-coating. He wants to get me down there. I'm afraid I won't swallow it.
Very well, Captain. Something I did come to discuss.
Yes, Mister Spock, what is it?
I picked this up from Doctor McCoy's log. We have a crewmember aboard who's showing signs of stress and fatigue. Reaction time down nine to twelve percent, associational reading norm minus three.
That's much too low a rating.
He's becoming irritable and quarrelsome, yet he refuses to take rest and rehabilitation. Now, He has that right, but we've found
A crewman's right ends where the safety of the ship begins. That man will go a shore on my orders. What's his name?
James Kirk. Enjoy yourself, Captain. It's an interesting planet. You'll find it quite pleasant. Very much like your Earth.
Scouts have detected no animals, artefacts, or force fields of any kind. Only peace, sunshine, and good air. You'll have no problems.
(the woman) Does it always have to be work with you? There's so much loveliness.
You won't find all this so lovely if our report for the Captain isn't ready when he asks for it, which shouldn't be long.
Rodriguez, Teller, everything all right?
Yes, sir. We've completed the specimen survey.
Good. That should be sufficient. Beam it up to Mister Spock when you're ready, and start enjoying yourselves.
Thank you, sir. And sir, I think you'll find Doctor McCoy and Mister Sulu that way.
Thank you.
Restful. After what we've been through, it's hard to believe a place this beautiful exists.
It is beautiful. So lovely, and restful. I mean, affirmative, Captain.
McCoy! McCoy!
Over here. Over here.
Bones, know any good rabbit jokes lately?
As a matter of fact, I do, but this is not one of them. Look at this. (a pair of large tracks in the soil) I saw what I saw, or maybe I hallucinated it, but I want you to take a look and tell me what you think about it.
Footprints. Could be a rabbit. It would have to be an unusual creature to make this size tracks. What about Mister Sulu? Will he confirm what you saw?
Negative. He was examining the flora at the time.
Bridge, this is the Captain.
Where is Mister Sulu?
Collecting specimens.
Bridge.
Has the first shore party beamed down yet?
Negative, Captain. They're just about to start.
Get this message to all shore parties. Stand by. No one is to leave the ship.
Aye, aye, sir.
You're cancelling the shore leave on account of this, Jim?
You're the doctor, Doctor. Can you explain this?
Well, no.
Neither can I. I admit it looks harmless. It probably is harmless. But before I bring my people down here, I want proof it's harmless.
What do you think you're doing?
Target shooting, Captain. Isn't it a beauty? Haven't got anything like this in my collection.
Where did you get it, Mister Sulu?
I found it. I know it's a crazy coincidence, but I've always wanted one like this. Found it lying right over there. An old-time police special, and in beautiful condition. Hasn't been one like this made in a couple of centuries.
(holding out his hand for the offending weapon) Mister Sulu.
(handing it over) It fires lead pellets propelled by expanding gases from a chemical explosion.
I'll hang on to it. The fresh air seems to have made you trigger-happy.
Doctor McCoy's rabbit, sir. He must have gone through here.
Are you sure our instruments didn't show any animal life on this planet?
Absolutely. No birds, no mammals, no insects, nothing. I'm certain our readings weren't off.
I'd like to believe this is an elaborate gag, but. Yeoman Barrows, you accompany Mister Sulu. Find out where those tracks came from. Doctor, you come with me back to the glade. I'd like another look at that area.
This is turning out to be one very unusual shore leave.
Well, it could have been worse.
How?
You could have seen the rabbit.
What's the matter, Bones, you getting a persecution complex?
Well, yeah, I'm beginning to feel a little bit picked on, if that's what you mean.
I know the feeling very well. I had it at the Academy. An upper classman there. One practical joke after another, and always on me. My own personal devil. A guy by the name of Finnegan.
And you being the very serious young
Serious? I'll make a confession, Bones. I was absolutely grim, which delighted Finnegan no end. He's the kind of guy to put a bowl of cold soup in your bed or a bucket of water propped on a half-open door. You never knew where he'd strike next. More tracks. Looks like your rabbit came from over there.
A girl's footprints. The young blonde girl I saw chasing it.
Yes. You follow the rabbit. I'll backtrack the girl. I'll meet you around the other side of the hill.
Good. I've got a personal grudge against that rabbit, Jim.
(in a dreadful cod-Irish accent) Jim.
Finnegan? I can't believe it.
You never know when I'm going to strike, huh, Jim? (hits him on the jaw) How's this? Come on, come on. It's me, Finnegan. All right, Jimmy boy. (maniacal laughter) Go ahead, lay one on me. That's what you always wanted, isn't it? Come on. Come on.
All right, let's try that one again. Go!
Go! Any excuse, Jim baby. Run away! Run away! Run away!
What was it?
Yeoman Barrows.
What happened?
I don't know. I mean I do know. I was following the tracks, and there he was.
Who was?
Him.
Barrows, give me a report.
He had a cloak, sir, and a dagger with jewels on it.
Are you sure you're not imagining all this?
Captain, I know it sounds incredible, but I did not imagine it any more than I imagined he did this.
Sounds like Don Juan.
Yes. Yes. It was so sort of story book walking around here, and I was thinking, all a girl needs is Don Juan. Just day dreaming, the way you would about someone you'd like to meet.
Mister Sulu was with you. Where is he now?
He ran after him.
Stay with her, Doctor.
Mister Sulu! Sulu!
Mister Sulu! Sulu!
Sulu!
Ruth? Ruth.
Jim, darling, it is me. It is Ruth.
(into communicator) McCoy, do you read me? Ruth. Ruth, how can it be you? How could you possibly be here? You haven't aged. It's been fifteen years.
It doesn't matter. None of that matters.
Kirk here.
Did you find Mister Sulu, Captain?
What?
Did you find Mister Sulu?
No, but I'm sure he's all right.
Sir? Are you all right?
Yes, I'm fine.
Rodriguez to Captain Kirk.
Yes, Mister Rodriguez.
Captain, a while ago, I saw well, birds, a whole flock of them.
Don't you like birds, Mister Rodriguez?
I like them fine, sir, but all our surveys showed
Sir, our surveys couldn't have been that wrong.
Mister Rodriguez, have the search parties rendezvous at the glade. I'd like some answers to all this.
Aye, aye, sir.
You have to go?
I don't want to.
You'll see me again if you want to.
You haven't told me. You haven't told me
Do what you have to do, and I'll be waiting.
Ruth.
Kirk here.
Captain.
Yes, Mister Spock.
I'm getting strange readings from the planet surface, Captain. Some sort of power field down there.
Specify.
A highly sophisticated type of energy draining our power and increasing, beginning to affect our communications.
Can you pinpoint the source?
Could be coming from beneath the planet's surface. Patterns indicate some sort of industrial activity.
Keep me posted, Mister Spock. We'll continue our investigation down here. Captain out.
Feeling better?
A little, but I wouldn't want to be alone here.
It's a beautiful place. A little strange, I'll admit.
That's just it. It's almost too beautiful. I was thinking, even before my tunic was torn, that in a place like this a girl should be, oh let's see now, a girl should be dressed like a fairy-tale princess, with lots of floaty stuff and a tall hat with a veil.
I see what you mean, but then you'd have whole armies of Don Juans to fight off. And me, too.
Is that a promise, Doctor?
Oh, Doctor, they're lovely. Look at me, Doctor. A lady to be protected and fought for. A princess of the blood royale.
You are all of those things and many more. They'll look even lovelier with you wearing them.
Doctor, I'm afraid.
Now, look, I don't know how or why, but the dress is here. I'd like to see you in it. Why don't you put it on?
All right, but you stay right there. Don't peek.
My dear girl, I am a doctor. When I peek, it's in the line of duty.
Calling Doctor McCoy.
McCoy here. I can't read you very well. Is this Rodriguez?
This is all the volume I can get on this thing. Can't read you well, either. Captain's orders. Rendezvous at that glade where he first found you.
Right. What the devil's wrong with communications? Esteban. Esteban.
Doctor. Doctor. Doctor McCoy!
You're the science officer, Mister Spock. I want some answers.
First there was McCoy's Alice in Wonderland where there was supposedly no animal life. And Sulu's gun where there's no refined metal detected. Rodriguez' birds. And then my, well, the two people I saw.
Any chance these could be hallucinations?
One hallucination flattened me with a clout on the jaw.
The other.
That sounds like a painful reality.
Yes.
There must be some logical explanation.
Your signal is very weak. Can you turn up your gain?
I'm already on maximum.
Captain, shall I beam down an armed party?
Negative. Our people here are armed with phasers. Besides, there's yet to be any real danger. (he sees geese flying overhead) Captain out.
McCoy. McCoy, do you read me? Kirk to McCoy. Come in.
Captain, take cover! There's a Samurai after me.
A what?
I mean, there was. (no one is chasing him now) Captain, you've got to believe me.
I do. I've met some interesting personalities myself. Have you seen any of the others while I've been gone?
Got a call a few minutes ago. Rodriguez. Said you were rendezvousing back at the glade.
I hope he got through to everybody. Communications are almost out.
That's not all. So's my phaser.
Yes, sir. (sound of a transporter beam) Look. Someone beaming down from the bridge.
Trying to. Something's obstructing it. (finally the familiar shape fully materialises) Mister Spock, my orders were no one was to leave the ship.
Necessary, Captain. Unable to contact you by communicator, and the transporter is useless to us now. As I told you before, there's an unusual power field down here. It's soaking up all the energy at the source. I calculated the rate of its growth, and reasoned that I just might be able to transport one more person.
Good. We can use your help.
We're stranded down here, Captain?
Until we can find out what this is all about.
There's no one here.
This is where the Captain said to rendezvous. (makes Tonia stand with her back to a tree) I swear I heard someone moving around.
Don't talk like that.
A princess shouldn't be afraid, not with a brave knight to protect her.
That way. Spread out. Let's find it.
These things cannot be real. Hallucinations can't harm us. Go back to where you were.
He's dead.
It's my fault. It never would have happened. It's my fault.
No.
It is, it is. I'm to blame.
Yeoman! We're in trouble. I need every crewman alert and thinking.
Aye, aye, sir.
(at the knight's body) Captain! Captain!
You'd better have a look at this, sir. (the knight is a plastic dummy) I don't understand.
Neither do I, Mister Sulu, but before we leave this planet, I will.
It's like a dummy, Captain. It couldn't be alive.
Tricorder?
Still operating, sir.
Mister Spock. (Spock and Sulu swap places, handing over the tricorder) What do you make of that?
This is not human skin tissue, Captain. It more closely resembles the cellular casting we use for wound repairs. Much finer, of course.
I want an exact judgment, Mister Spock.
This is definitely a mechanical contrivance. It has the same basic cell structure as the plants here, even the trees, the grass.
Are you saying this is a plant, Mister Spock?
I'm saying that these are all multicellular castings. The plants, the animals, the people. They're all being manufactured.
By who? And why? And why these particular things?
All we know for certain is that they act exactly like the real thing. Just as pleasant or just as deadly.
What is it?
Of all the crazy things. Remember what I was telling you a while ago, about the early wars and funny air vehicles they used? That's one of them.
Can it hurt us?
Not unless it makes a strafing run.
A what?
The way they used to attack people on the ground. (the plane descends) Come on.
Angela.
Captain!
McCoy's body?
He's gone. Dragged off.
The black knight, too.
Spock?
At this point, Captain, my analysis may not sound very scientific.
McCoy's death is a scientific fact.
There is one slight possibility, very slim, but nevertheless. Captain, what were your thoughts just before you encountered the people you described?
I was, I was thinking about the Academy. My days
Hey, Jim baby! I see you brought out reinforcements. Ha! Well, I'm waiting for you, Jimmy boy.
Finnegan. Finnegan! What's been happening to my people?
Take Sulu. Find McCoy's body. This man is my problem.
Captain, wait.
That's an order, Mister Spock.
Here I am! Run!
Jim! Find me! Can't you see me? Come and get me! Here I am! Come on. You never could find your head with both hands! Like it used to be, Jimmy. Remember? (finally Kirk catches up to him, because he's lounging on a ledge) Hey, Jim
I want some answers.
Coming up.
Get up. Get up. Get up. Always fight fair, don't you? True officer and gentleman, you. You stupid underclassman. I've got the edge. I'm still twenty years old. Look at you. You're an old man.
I can't move me leg. I can't feel me leg. My back is broken. You've broken me back.
Can you feel that?
Can you feel that, now? (Kirk passes out) Sleep sweet, Jimmy boy. Sleep as long as you like. Sleep forever, Jim boy. Forever and forever.
Won't you ever learn, Jim boy? You never could take me, you know.
Finnegan. One thing
Sure. Name it.
Answers.
Earn them!
Not bad. Kind of makes up for things, huh, Jim?
A lot of things. What's been happening to my people?
I never answer questions from plebes, Jimmy boy.
I'm not a plebe. This is today, fifteen years later. What are you doing here?
I'm being exactly what you expect me to be, Jimmy boy.
Did you enjoy it, Captain?
Yes, I enjoyed it. After all these years. (realisation dawns) I did enjoy it. The one thing I wanted to do after all these years was to beat the tar out of Finnegan.
Which supports a theory I've been formulating.
That we're all meeting people and things that we happen to be thinking about at the moment.
Yes. Somehow our thoughts are read, these things are quickly manufactured and provided for us.
Dangerous if we happen to be thinking about
Yes. We must all control our thoughts.
Difficult.
The force field we encountered is obviously underground, manufacturing these things. Passages lead to the surface. Just for example, when Rodriguez thought of a tiger
Spock.
We've got to get back to the landing party and warn them.
Sulu, Rodriguez, Barrows. Front and centre.
Sir.
Don't ask any questions, Sulu. Face front, everyone. Don't talk. Don't breathe. Don't think. You're at attention. Concentrate on that and only that. Concentrate.
Captain.
Who are you?
I'm the caretaker of this place, Captain Kirk.
You know my name?
But of course. Lieutenant Rodriguez, Lieutenant Sulu, Yeoman Barrows and Mister Spock. We've just discovered you don't understand all this. These experiences were intended to amuse you.
Amuse? That's your word for what we've been through?
But none of this is permanent. Here you have to only imagine your fondest wishes, either old ones you wish to relive or new ones, anything at all. Battle, fear, love, triumph. Anything that pleases you can be made to happen.
The term is amusement park.
Of course.
An old Earth name for a place where people could go to see and do all sorts of fascinating things.
This entire planet was constructed for our race of people to come and play.
Play? As advanced as you obviously are, and you still play?
Yes, play, Mister Sulu. The more complex the mind, the greater the need for the simplicity of play.
Exactly, Captain. How very perceptive of you.
But that still doesn't explain the death of my ship's surgeon.
Possibly because no one has died, Jim. (Strolls in with a lovely girl on each arm) I was taken below the surface for some rather remarkable repairs. It's amazing. They've got a factory complex down there you wouldn't believe. They can build or do anything immediately.
(not amused) And how do you explain them?
Oh. Them. Well I, er, I was thinking about a little cabaret I know on Rigel Two, and, er, there were these two girls in the chorus line. And well, here they are. Well after all, I am on shore leave.
And so am l.
Oh, yes. So you are. Well, girls, I suppose you can turn something up.
We regret that some of you've been made uncomfortable.
You say your people built all this. Who are you? What planet are you from?
My impression is that your race is not yet ready to understand us, Captain.
I tend to agree.
Kirk here.
This is the bridge, Captain. Our power systems have just come back in. Do you require assistance?
No, everything is in order, Lieutenant. Stand by.
However.
Aye, aye, sir.
If you would use the proper caution, this amusement planet of ours could be an ideal place for your people to enjoy themselves, if you wish.
It's what the doctor ordered, Jim.
Lieutenant.
Sir?
Commence transporting shore leave parties. Tell them to prepare for the best shore leave they've ever had. Kirk out.
(handing the girl over to Sulu) Captain, I'll go back aboard ship and take over. With all due respect to the young lady, I've already had as much shore leave as I care for.
No, Mister Spock. I'll go. You. (then he sees Ruth walking towards the group) On the other hand, I'll stay for a day or two.
Did you enjoy your rest, gentlemen?
Yes, we did, Mister Spock. I think we did.
Indeed we did, Mister Spock.
Most illogical.
Ahead warp factor one, Mister Sulu.
The Galileo Seven
Captain to shuttlecraft Galileo. Stand by, Mister Spock.
I remind you, Captain, I'm entirely opposed to this delay. Your mission is to get those emergency medical supplies to Makus Three in time for their transfer to the New Paris colonies.
No problem, Commissioner. And may I remind you that I have standing orders to investigate all quasars and quasar-like phenomena wherever they may be encountered. Besides, it's three days to Makus. And the rendezvous doesn't take place for five.
I don't like to take chances. The plague is out of control on New Paris. We must get those drugs there on time.
No problem. Captain to Galileo. All systems cleared for take off.
Power up. All instruments activated. All readings normal. All go.
Launch shuttlecraft.
Readings normal. Acceleration normal. Phase one separation normal.
Position?
Three point seven. Sir, I
Make up your mind please, Mister Latimer.
Sir, this indicator's gone crazy.
That's to be expected, Mister Spock. Quasars are extremely disruptive. Just how much, we don't know.
Considerably, Mister Boma.
Mister Spock, radiation is increasing.
Stop forward momentum, Mister Latimer.
I can't, sir. Nothing happens.
Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise. Come in, please.
Ionic interference, Mister Spock.
We're being drawn right into it.
Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise. We are out of control, being pulled directly into the heart of Murasaki three one two. Being hit by violent radiation on outer hull. Course three point two five
Anything at all?
Nothing clear, Captain. Just a few words about being pulled off course.
Try and get me a fix on the Galileo.
Scanners are blank, Captain. We're getting a mass of readings I've never seen. Nothing makes sense.
Negative ionic concentration one point six four times ten to the ninth power metres, Radiation wave length three hundred seventy angstroms. Harmonics upward along entire spectrum.
What is it, Captain?
That thing out there has ionized this complete sector. None of our instruments work. At least four complete solar systems in the immediate vicinity. And out there somewhere, a twenty four foot shuttlecraft, off course, out of control. Finding a needle in a haystack would be child's play.
I was opposed to this from the very beginning. Our flight to Makus Three is of the very highest priority.
I'm aware of that, Commissioner. At the same time I have certain scientific duties I must perform, and investigating the Murasaki effect is one.
Yes, but you've lost your crew.
We have two days to find them.
Two days? ln all that? Two days?
What would you have me do, turn around and leave them there?
You shouldn't have sent them out in the first place. Do you know what you've done? You've concerned yourself with only seven people.
Captain, there's one planet in this solar system capable of sustaining human life. It's type M, oxygen, nitrogen, and it's listed as Taurus Two. It's unexplored. As far as we can determine with our equipment malfunction, it's just about dead-centre of the Murasaki effect.
Thank you, Lieutenant. Mister Sulu.
Yes, sir.
Set course for Taurus Two.
Aye, aye, sir.
You said something about a needle in a haystack. It's useless.
If they're not there, Commissioner, then they're dead by now.
You all right?
(Holding his right wrist) Yes.
Scotty? Boma?
Now that's what I call a ride.
Yeoman?
Yes. I just got a little bump on the head.
(helping her back into her seat) Upsy-daisy.
Thank you.
What happened?
I can't be sure, but I'd say that, the magnetic potential of the effect was (McCoy gives him a tissue for his nose bleed) Thank you. Was such that, as we gathered speed, it was multiplied geometrically. And we were simply shot into the centre of the effect. Like a projectile.
I'd say your evaluation is reasonable, Mister Boma.
What a mess.
Picturesque descriptions will not mend broken circuits, Mister Scott. I think you'll find your work is cut out for you. Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise. Come in, please.
You don't really expect to get an answer, do you?
I expect nothing, Mister Scott. It is merely logical to try all the alternatives. Doctor McCoy, a reading on the atmosphere, please.
Partial pressure of oxygen, seventy millimetres of mercury. Nitrogen one forty. Breathable, if you're not running in competition.
Just the facts, Doctor.
Traces of argon, neon, krypton, all in acceptable quantities. However, I wouldn't recommend this place as a summer resort.
Thank you for your opinion. It will be duly noted. You're recording this, Yeoman?
Of course, Mister Spock.
Mister Scott, if you'll make a survey of the damage, please.
Logical.
Gentlemen, I think we should move outside, make room for Mister Scott to do his work. Mister Latimer, Mister Gaetano, you'll arm yourselves and scout out the area, keeping in visual contact with the ship.
Aye, aye, sir.
What do you think our chances are of contacting the Enterprise?
Under present conditions, extremely poor.
But they'll be looking for us.
If the ionisation effect is as widespread as I believe it is, Doctor, they'll be searching for us without instrumentation, by visual contact only. On those terms, this is a very large planet.
Then you don't think they'll find us.
Not as long as we're grounded. We may be here for a very long time, Doctor.
Nothing, Captain.
Mister Sulu.
Yes, Captain?
Anything on your scanners?
Totally inoperative, sir. No readings at all.
Have you tried tying in to the auxiliary power?
Yes, sir. No change.
Transport room, this is the captain speaking. Are the transporters beaming up yet?
Not one hundred percent, Captain. We beamed down some inert material, but it came back in a disassociated condition. We wouldn't dare try with people.
Thank you. This is the captain speaking. Flight deck, prepare Columbus for immediate exit, for a search of the planet surface. Correlate co-ordinates with Mister Sulu. Thank you. Anything, Uhura?
All wavelengths dominated by ionisation effects, sir. Transmission is blocked, reception impossible.
Well, Captain?
We have until 2823.8 to continue the search, Commissioner.
You don't really think you'll have any luck, do you?
Look, these people are my friends and my shipmates. I intend to continue the ship's search for them until the last possible moment.
Very well, Captain, but not one second beyond that moment. Is that clear? If it isn't, I suggest you look at book nineteen, section four thirty three, paragraph twelve.
I'm familiar with the regulations, Commissioner. I know all about your authority. Launch shuttlecraft Columbus.
Well, I can't say much for the circumstances, but at least it's your big chance.
My big chance? For what, Doctor?
Command. Oh, I know you, Mister Spock. You've never voiced it, but you've always thought that logic was the best basis on which to build command. Am I right?
I am a logical man, Doctor.
It'll take more than logic to get us out of this.
Perhaps, Doctor, but I know of no better way to begin. I realise command does have its fascinations, even under circumstances such as these. But I neither enjoy the idea of command, nor am I frightened of it. It simply exists. And I will do whatever logically needs to be done. Excuse me.
Very bad, Mister Spock.
In what way?
We've lost a great deal of fuel. We have no chance at all to reach escape velocity. And if we ever hope to make orbit, we'll have to lighten our load by at least five hundred pounds.
The weight of three grown men.
Aye, you could put it that way.
Or the equivalent weight in equipment.
Doctor McCoy, with very few exceptions we use virtually every piece of equipment aboard this craft in attaining orbit. There's very little excess weight, except among the passengers.
You mean three of us must stay behind.
Unless the situation changes radically, yes.
And who's to choose?
As commanding officer, the choice will be mine.
You wouldn't be interested in drawing lots?
A very quaint idea, Mister Boma, but I do believe I'm better qualified to make the selection than any random drawing of lots.
All right, Mister Spock. Who?
My choice will be a logical one, arrived at through logical means.
Mister Spock, life and death are seldom logical.
But attaining a desired goal always is, Doctor. Now gentlemen, I suggest we move outside to make a further examination of the hull in the event we've overlooked any minor damage.
If any minor damage was overlooked, it was when they put his head together.
Not his head, Mister Boma, his heart. His heart.
What is it?
II don't know. It's from up there.
No, it's from back there.
It's everywhere. It's all around us!
Let's get out of here.
Come on, Boma.
What was it?
It was something huge, terrible. Up there. I think I hit it.
Did you see what it was?
Vaguely. It was like a giant ape.
Poor Latimer.
At least it was quick for him.
We'll get off all right.
(returns from investigating) Nothing there.
I tell you there was.
I don't doubt your word.
But there must be something. I swear I hit it.
(pulling the bloody spear from Latimer's body and examining it) Folsom Point.
Sir?
There's a remarkable resemblance to the Folsom Point discovered in 1925, old world calendar, New Mexico, North America. A bit more crude about the shaft, I believe. Not very efficient.
Not very efficient? Is that all you have to say?
Am I in error, Mister Boma?
You? Error? Impossible.
Then what, Mister Boma?
There's a man lying there dead, and you talk about stone spears. What about Latimer?
My concern for the dead will not bring him back to life, Mister Boma.
Mister Spock. In the interest of efficiency, I don't think we should leave his body here.
Bringing him back to the ship should not interfere with our repair efforts. If you need assistance, I
We'll do it. Give me a hand with Latimer, will you?
Captain, the Columbus has returned from searching quadrant seven seven nine X by five three four M. Results negative.
Have them proceed to the next quadrant. Any word from engineering on our sensors?
They're working on them, sir. Still inoperable.
What about the transporters?
They're still reported unsafe.
Thank you, Lieutenant.
Captain.
Yes, Commissioner?
I don't relish the thought of abandoning your crewmen out there, however I must remind you
I haven't forgotten, Commissioner.
You're running out of time.
I haven't forgotten that, Commissioner. This is the captain. Try using overload power on the transporters. We've got to get them working.
Aye, aye, Captain.
Uhura, order the Columbus to open its course two degrees on every lap from now on.
But Captain, two degrees means they'll be overlooking more than a dozen terrestrial miles on each search loop.
It also means we have a fighting chance to cover the majority of the planet's surface. Mind your helm, Mister Sulu.
Yes, sir.
(stepping into the turbolift) Twenty four more hours, Captain.
Perhaps if you were to channel the second auxiliary tank through the primary intake valve.
It's too delicate. It may not be able to take the pressure as it is.
(coming in from rear compartment) This should save us at least fifty pounds, Mister Spock.
Excellent, Doctor.
We should be able to scrape up another hundred pounds.
Which would still leave us at least one hundred and fifty pounds overweight.
I can't believe you're serious about leaving someone behind. Now whatever it is that's out there
It is more rational to sacrifice one life than six, Doctor.
I'm not talking about rationality.
You might be wise to start.
(looking in from outside) Mister Spock. we're ready.
For what?
The services for Latimer.
Mister Boma, we're working against time.
The man's dead. He deserves a decent burial. You're the captain. A few words.
Doctor, perhaps you know the correct words for such an occasion.
Mister Spock, that's your place.
My place is here. If you please, Doctor.
Now look. We may all die here. At least let us die like men, not machines.
By dealing with first things first, I hope to increase our chances of staying alive. Well, Mister Scott.
If you'll give me a hand with this conduit.
Pressure's dropping. We're losing everything.
What happened?
One of the lines gave. The strain of coming through the atmosphere and the added load when we tried to bypass. Yes, that's done it. We have no fuel.
That would seem to solve the problem of who to leave behind. Consider the alternatives, Mister Scott.
We have no fuel! What alternatives?
Mister Scott, there are always alternatives.
Mister Spock! Something's happening outside.
What do those supersensitive ears make of that, Mister Spock?
Wood rubbing on some kind of leather.
They're getting ready. They'll attack.
Not necessarily. It could be a simple tribal rite, assuming a tribal culture.
Not a tribal culture. Their artefacts are too primitive. More likely a loose association of some sort.
If we knew more about them
We know enough. If they're tribal, they'll have a sense of unity. We can use that.
How, Mister Boma?
By hitting them hard. Give them a bloody nose. Make them think twice about attacking us.
Yes, I agree. If we stand by and do nothing, we're just giving them an invitation to come down and slaughter us.
I'm frequently appalled by the low regard you Earthmen have for life.
Well, we're practical about it. I say we hit them before they hit us.
Mister Boma?
Absolutely.
Doctor McCoy?
Seems logical to me.
It does, indeed. It seems logical to me, also. But to take life indiscriminately,
The majority.
I am not interested in the opinion of the majority, Mister Gaetano. Components must be weighed. Our danger to ourselves as well as our duties to other life forms, friendly or not. There's a third course.
That could get us killed.
I think not. Doctor McCoy.
Yes.
You and Yeoman Mears return to the ship. Assist Mister Scott in any way possible. We'll be back shortly.
Right.
Gentlemen, you'll follow my orders to the letter, firing only when so instructed, and at my designated targets.
Now you're talking.
We'll fire to frighten, Mister Gaetano, not to kill.
Oh, for the. You saw what they did to Latimer!
I am in command, Mister Gaetano. The orders and the responsibility will be mine. Follow me.
The mists. I can't see them.
I hear them. They're directly ahead of us. Several, I believe. Direct your phasers to two o'clock and to ten o'clock.
I say we hit them dead on.
Yes, I know. But fortunately, I'm giving the orders. Take aim please, and fire when I give a signal.
Fire. (several seconds of sustained phaser beam) Cease fire. (It's gone quiet) They should think twice before bothering us again.
I still say we should have killed them.
It was not necessary. Fear will do for us what needs to be done. Mister Boma, you will return with me to the Galileo. Mister Gaetano, you remain on guard here. Keep in contact with the ship.
Did you find them?
Yes, we found them. They won't bother us again.
I hope not. Scotty has an idea.
It's dangerous, but it might work.
Go, Mister Scott.
I can adjust the main reactor to function with a substitute fuel supply.
That's all very well, but we don't have a substitute supply.
Aye, we do. Our phasers. I can adapt them and use their energy. It'll take time, but it's possible.
Trouble is, they happen to be our only defence.
They would also seem to be our only hope.
Aye.
(after brief thought) Yeoman, your phaser.
But what if the creatures attack again?
They won't attack for at least several hours. By then, with luck, we'll be gone.
If I can get a full load, we should be able to achieve orbit with all hands. Not that we can maintain it long.
We don't have to maintain it very long, Mister Scott. In less than twenty four hours, the Enterprise will be forced to abandon its search in order to make a rendezvous. If we can't maintain orbit after that time, it won't make any difference. If we burn up in a decaying orbit or die here on the planet's surface, we shall surely die. Doctor, your phaser. Go to work, Mister Scott.
Aye, aye, sir.
They came back all right, sir. In my opinion, the transporters are now safe for human transport.
Good. This is the captain. Landing parties one, two, and three, report to transporter room for immediate beaming down to surface of the planet. Ordinance condition One A.
Captain, it's a big planet. It'll be sheer luck if our landing parties find anything.
I'm depending on luck, Lieutenant. It's almost the only tool we have that'll work.
Take this back to Mister Scott for conversion, please Doctor.
Nobody knows what's happened to Gaetano, and you hand over his phaser like nothing's happened at all.
(handing over his own phaser) And give this to Mister Scott in the event I don't return.
Just where are you going?
I have a certain scientific curiosity about what's become of Mister Gaetano. Return to the ship, please.
I don't know. He'll risk his neck locating Gaetano and if he finds him, he's just as liable to order him to stay behind. You tell me.
Do you really think the ship will ever leave?
Well, it won't unless we get these phasers back.
Well, Mister Spock, they didn't stay frightened very long, did they?
Most illogical reaction. We demonstrated our superior weapons. They should have fled.
You mean they should have respected us?
Of course.
Mister Spock, respect is a rational process. Did it ever occur to you they might react emotionally, with anger?
Doctor, I am not responsible for their unpredictability.
They were perfectly predictable to anyone with feeling. You might as well admit it, Mister Spock, your precious logic brought them down on us.
Why haven't they done anything?
They're studying us, for the moment.
Another prediction, Mister Spock?
My opinion, Mister Boma.
Seal the windows!
Studying us, Mister Spock? They seem to learn rather quickly.
All right, Spock, you have all the answers. What now?
Mister Boma, your tone is increasingly hostile.
My tone isn't the only thing that's hostile, Mister Spock!
Curious. Most illogical.
I'm sick and tired of your logic!
We could use a little inspiration.
Strange. Step by step, I have made the correct and logical decisions. And yet two men have died.
And you've brought our furry friends down on us.
I do seem to have miscalculated regarding them, and inculcated resentment on your parts. The sum of the parts cannot be greater than the whole.
How much longer, Mister Scott?
Another hour, maybe two.
That won't be long enough.
Doctor, a phaser can only drain so fast.
How long do you think those plates will hold out under this? We've got to do something!
You've got your hands full.
What word from the sensor section?
At last report they were getting some readings
I'm not interested in the last report. I want to know now.
Yes, sir.
You have two hours and forty three minutes, Captain.
I'm perfectly aware of how much time I have left.
I'm delighted. However I shall continue to remind you.
You do that.
Sir, sensor section reporting. Static interference still creating false images. Estimates eighty percent undependable.
What about radio communication?
Clearing slowly. Still incapable of transmission or reception.
What do you intend to do?
Do? I intend to continue the search. Foot by foot, inch by inch, by candlelight if necessary, until the last possible moment. And if you'd keep your nose off my bridge, I'd be thankful.
I'm sure the authorities will be pleased by your diligence, Captain. I'm not sure they'll appreciate the way you address a High Commissioner.
I'm in command here, Mister Ferris.
You are, Captain. For another two hours and forty two minutes.
Mister Scott, how much power do we have left in the ship's batteries?
They're in good shape, but they won't lift us off, if that's what you're getting at.
Will they electrify the exterior of this ship?
That they will, Mister Spock!
Get to the centre of the ship. Don't touch the plates. Be sure you're insulated. Stand by. Are you ready, Scott?
Ready, Mister Spock.
All right. Go. (Scott uses a spanner or something to short out the battery connections) Again! Again!
I daren't use any more. Not and be sure of ignition.
I believe we've used enough. Mister Scott. I suggest you continue draining the phasers.
Aye.
It must've worked.
For the moment.
For the moment?
The moment they discover they're not seriously hurt, they'll be back. Meanwhile, please check the aft compartment. See if there's anything you can unload to lighten the ship.
Mister Gaetano's body's back there.
It will of course have to be left behind.
Not without a burial.
I wouldn't recommend it. The creatures won't be far away.
Not without a burial, Mister Spock.
It would expose members of this crew to unnecessary peril.
I'll take that chance. You see, Mister Spock, I would insist upon a decent burial even if your body was back there.
Mister Boma.
I'm sick and tired of this machine!
That's enough!
Gentlemen. All right, Mister Boma, you'll have your burial, provided the creatures will permit it.
Captain Kirk, landing party number two has been beamed back aboard ship. They have casualties. One dead, two injured.
(going to Spock's station) Put Lieutenant Kelowitz on visual.
Kelowitz, Captain.
Report.
We were attacked, Captain. Huge, furry creatures. I checked with astral anthropology, and they're order 480G, anthropoid. Similar to life forms discovered on Hansen's Planet, but much larger. Ten, twelve feet in height.
There are casualties?
Ensign O'Neal got a spear through the body before we even knew they were around. Lieutenant lmmamura has a dislocated shoulder and severe lacerations, but he'll make it all right. Captain, the creatures are all over the place. If the Galileo is down on that planet, I
Thank you, Lieutenant. You'd better report to Sickbay yourself.
Aye, aye, Captain.
Captain Kirk, check your chronometer. You'll see that it is 2823.8. Your time is up.
But they're still out there.
So are the plague victims on New Paris. I'm sorry, Captain. I now assume authority granted me under Title fifteen, Galactic Emergency Procedures, and I order you to abandon search.
The Columbus hasn't returned yet. I still have two search parties out.
You're procrastinating, Captain. You have your orders. Recall your search parties and proceed to Makus Three immediately.
Lieutenant.
Yes, sir.
Order the transporter room to immediately beam up the two search parties from the surface. Attempt to contact the Columbus.
I'm in partial contact with them now, sir.
Then have them return immediately. Mister Sulu, prepare to abandon search. Set course for Makus Three.
Captain, the sensor section says the beams are working again.
What about the other systems?
No, sir. Too much interference.
Captain, course set for Makus Three.
Stand ready, Mister Sulu. How long before the Columbus comes on board?
Twenty three minutes, sir.
Twenty three minutes.
Enterprise, this is Galileo. Come in, please. Enterprise. Nothing, sir. Just ionic interference.
That's it.
How about weight?
If we shed every ounce, we might be able to achieve orbit.
And how long can we hold it?
A few hours, no longer. But if we time it right, we can cut out of orbit and save enough fuel for a controlled re=entry.
To land here again? Not a very attractive possibility.
We have very few alternatives, Mister Spock.
Doctor McCoy. Mister Boma. When can we lift off, Scott?
Maybe eight minutes if the weight's right.
Gentlemen, The ship will lift off in exactly ten minutes. You have that long to bury Mister Gaetano. Now, it appears to be clear outside, at least for the moment. I'll assist you. Hurry.
The Columbus is aboard, sir. The flight hatch is closed. Transporter room reports last of the landing parties have beamed safely up. All systems report secured for warp factors.
Mister Sulu, proceed on course for Makus Three, at space normal speed.
Space normal, sir?
Those are my orders. Lieutenant Uhura, order all sensor sections to direct beams aft. Full function, continuous operation until further orders.
Yes, sir.
Get into the ship! Immediate lift off!
No! Go back! Lift off! Go back! No!
All right, All right! Go! Go! Go! Go!
Go, Scott!
Aye, aye, sir.
I told you to lift off!
Don't be a fool, Mister Spock. We couldn't leave you out there.
Get us off, Scott!
We should be moving, but we're not.
Quite right, Mister Scott. There's somebody holding us down. All systems are go, but we're not moving.
What are you doing?
Our boosters.
We'll never be able to hold orbit.
Would you rather stay here?
No, Mister Spock.
We're moving!
They let go!
We got off!
May I remind you we have yet to achieve orbit, nor can we maintain it long. An hour from now we may be right back where we started from.
Gentlemen, by coming after me, you may well have destroyed what slim chance you had for survival. The logical thing for you to have done was to have left me behind.
Mister Spock, remind me to tell you that I'm sick and tired of your logic.
That is a most illogical attitude. Orbit in one minute, Mister Scott. Fuel status?
Fifteen pounds psi. Approximately enough for one orbit, sir.
After that?
Tapping our boosters ended our last chance for a soft landing.
You mean a burn-up?
It is the usual end of a decaying orbit.
I don't want to die up here.
Infinitely preferable to the kind of death we'd be granted on the planet's surface, I should think.
I admire your ability to make so measured a choice.
Mister Spock, you said a while ago that there were always alternatives.
Did l? I may have been mistaken.
Well, at least I lived long enough to hear that. Is there anything we can do?
The Enterprise is surely on course for Makus Three by now. I for one do not believe in angels.
Well, Mister Spock, so ends your first command.
Yes. My first command.
Orbit attitude, Mister Spock. With our present fuel, that gives us about forty five minutes.
Galileo to Enterprise. Galileo to Enterprise, come in, please. Galileo to Enterprise. Come in, please.
Mister Spock!
What happened?
He jettisoned the fuel and ignited it.
We need that fuel to maintain orbit. Are you out of your mind?
Perhaps, Mister Boma.
How long have we got now, Scotty?
The orbit'll start decaying as soon as the fuel's exhausted. Say six minutes.
Captain, there's something there on screen, at Taurus Two.
Sensors, a meteorite?
No. It's holding a lateral line. There it is again. Holding steady, Captain.
A hundred and eighty degrees about, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant Uhura, contact transporter room. All beams ready. Full normal speed.
A distress signal? It's like sending up a flare. Mister Spock, that was a good gamble. Perhaps it was worth it.
No one out there to see it.
Orbit decaying, Mister Spock. Ten seconds to atmosphere.
It may be the last action you'll ever take, Mister Spock, but it was all human.
Totally illogical. There was no chance.
That's exactly what I mean.
It's getting hot.
Transporters locked in, sir.
Activate beams.
Whatever it was, Captain, it just burned up in the atmosphere.
Captain, transporter room just beamed up five persons. Alive and well.
Mister Sulu, proceed on course to Makus Three. Ahead warp factor one.
Aye, aye, sir. Warp factor one.
Mister Spock.
Captain.
There's really something I don't understand about all of this. Maybe you can explain it to me. Logically, of course. When you jettisoned the fuel and ignited it, you knew there was virtually no chance of it being seen, yet you did it anyhow. That would seem to me to be an act of desperation.
Quite correct, Captain.
Now we all know, and I'm sure the doctor will agree with me, that desperation is a highly emotional state of mind. How does your well-known logic explain that?
Quite simply, Captain. I examined the problem from all angles, and it was plainly hopeless. Logic informed me that under the circumstances, the only possible action would have to be one of desperation. Logical decision, logically arrived at.
I see. You mean you reasoned that it was time for an emotional outburst.
Well, I wouldn't put it in exactly those terms, Captain, but those are essentially the facts.
You're not going to admit that for the first time in your life, you committed a purely human emotional act?
No, sir.
Mister Spock, you're a stubborn man.
Yes, sir.
The Squire of Gothos
All clear ahead, Captain. The sensors indicate zero register.
Forward readings, Mister Spock.
Gravimetric readings, no significant change, zero space density.
Ahead warp factor three, Mister Sulu. Colony Beta Six wants their supplies. Let's get across this void in a hurry.
Void, star desert. The word conjures up pictures of dunes, oases, mirages.
Sunlight, palm trees. We're nine hundred light years from that kind of desert, Bones.
The precise meaning of the word desert is a waterless, barren wasteland. I fail to understand your romantic nostalgia for such a place.
That doesn't surprise me, Mister Spock. I can't imagine a mirage ever disturbing those mathematically perfect brain waves of yours.
Thank you, Doctor McCoy. Moving on schedule into quadrant nine oh four. Beta Six is eight days distant.
Something, Mister Spock?
Unusual, Captain. I'm now getting a sizable space-displacement reading.
Can you verify that, Navigator?
No, sir. Forward sweeps are negative. Wait. Verified, sir. We must be in some sort of light warp or we'd have picked it up earlier.
Put it on visual.
Iron-silica body, planet sized, magnitude one E. We'll be passing close.
Inconceivable this body has gone unnoted on all our records.
And yet, here it is. No time to investigate. Science stations, gather data for computer banks. Uhura, notify the discovery on subspace radio.
Strong interference on subspace, Captain. The planet must be a natural radio source.
Let's get out of its range. Veer forty degrees to starboard, Mister Sulu.
Forty degrees.
Sulu!
Mister Spock, they're gone!
Emergency! Full reverse power!
We've searched again from stem to stern. If they're not down on that planet, they're nowhere.
No sign of human life on the surface, sir. Unless the instruments aren't functioning.
Function is normal. Continuous sensor sweeps. Lieutenant Uhura, have you checked all wave bands?
All of them, Mister Spock. No response.
With due respect, sir. Request permission to transport to the surface immediately and carry out a search.
I second DeSalle's request. What are we waiting for?
The decision will be mine, Doctor. I have the responsibility for your safety. (to Sulu's replacement) Mister Jaeger, describe your geophysical findings for the surface below.
No detectable soil or vegetation. Extremely hot, toxic atmosphere swept by tornadic storm. Continuous volcanic eruptions. Deadly to any lifeforms such as we know it without oxygen and life-support systems.
Estimate survival time of two unprotected individuals down there.
Not very long.
Mister Spock. Look.
Greetings and felicitations. Hmm. Send this, Lieutenant. USS Enterprise to signaler on planet surface. Identify self.
Hip hip hoorah? And I believe it's pronounced tally ho.
Some kind of a joke, sir?
I'll entertain any theories, Mister DeSalle. Any at all.
One thing is certain. Obviously there's life on that planet.
You're quite correct, Doctor. Prepare transporter room.
Request assignment to the search party, sir.
No, Mister Scott. Neither you nor I can be spared here. Mister DeSalle, equip the landing party with full communications, armament, and life-support gear. Mister Jaeger, your geophysical knowledge may be crucial down there. Doctor McCoy will accompany. If those peculiar signals are coming from Captain Kirk or Lieutenant Sulu, their rationality is in question. Dismissed.
No more messages from below, sir, but I've locked onto their original source.
Very good. Transmit coordinates to Mister Scott. Once on the planet's surface, you'll establish contact with us immediately. Use the laser beacon if necessary. Ready, Scott?
Ready, Mister Spock.
Activate.
Where are your storms, Jaeger?
Atmosphere exactly the same as ours.
DeSalle to Enterprise. DeSalle to Enterprise. It doesn't function. We're cut off.
(trying his own communicator) No response.
(to Jaeger) Keep trying with yours. Something's blocking the beacon. I've got to find open ground.
Mister Jaeger! McCoy!
In the name of heaven, where are we?
Look.
There's no reading. They're like waxworks figures.
I must say, they make a perfectly exquisite display pair, but I suppose you want them back now.
Where are we?
Welcome to an island of peace on my stormy little planet of Gothos.
What happened? Fill me in.
You disappeared from the bridge after Sulu. We've been looking for you for four hours.
You must excuse my whimsical way of fetching you here, but when I saw you passing by I simply could not resist.
I'm Captain James Kirk of the United Starship Enterprise.
Ah, so you're the Captain of these brave lads. My greetings and felicitations, Captain. So good of you and your officers to drop in. Absolutely smashing.
Who are you? Where do you come from?
We've lost contact with the ship, Captain. We're trapped here.
I can't tell you how delighted I am to have visitors from the very planet that I've made my hobby. Yes, but according to my observations, I didn't think you capable of such voyages.
Notice the period, Captain. Nine hundred light years from Earth. It's what might be seen through a viewing scope if it were powerful enough.
Ah, yes. I've been looking in on the doings on your lively little Earth.
Then you've been looking in on the doings nine hundred years past.
Oh, really? Have I made an error in time? How fallible of me. Oh, I did so want to make you feel at home. I'm quite proud of the detail.
General Trelane.
Retired, sir. Just Squire Trelane now. And you may call me Squire. Yes, I rather fancy that.
For what purpose have you imprisoned us here?
Imprisoned? Nonsense. You're my guests. You see, I just finished my studies of your curious and fascinating society. You came by at the most propitious moment. I want to know all about your campaigns, your battles, your missions of conquest.
Our missions are peaceful, not for conquest. When we do battle, it is only because we have no choice.
Ah, but that's the official story, eh?
I must ask you to let us go back to our ship.
I wouldn't hear of it. You shall join me in a repast. I want to learn all about your feelings on war and killing and conquest. That sort of thing. Do you know that you're one of the few predator species that preys even on itself?
Not yet. Put it on stun, not to kill, DeSalle.
DeSalle, did you say? Un vrai Francais?
My ancestry is French, yes.
Ah, monsieur. Vive la gloire. Vive Napoleon. You know, I admire your Napoleon very much.
This is Mister DeSalle, our navigator. Doctor McCoy, our medical officer. Mister Sulu, our helmsman, and Carl Jaeger, meteorologist.
Welcome, good physicianer and honourable sir. (bows low)
Is he kidding?
Und Offizier Jaeger, und der deutsche Soldat, nein? (gives a little Prussian salute then marches around) Eins, zwei, drei, vier. Gehen vir mit dem Schiessgewehr.
I'm a scientist, not a military man.
Oh come now. We're all military men under the skin. And how we do love our uniforms.
What an interesting weapon you've got there. Do let me see it.
Oh, how marvellous! (destroys another exhibit) Devastating! Why, this could kill millions.
Who will you start with, my crew? Are we your next targets?
Oh, how absolutely typical of your species. You don't understand something, so you become fearful. Now, do let me anticipate your next question. You want to know how I've managed all of this.
That's correct.
We, meaning I and others, have, to state the matter briefly, perfected a system by which matter can be transferred to energy and back to matter again.
Like the transporter system aboard the Enterprise.
Oh, a crude example of an infinitely more sophisticated process. You see, we not only transport matter from place to place, but we can alter its shape at will.
This drawing room, did you create it by rearranging matter on this planet?
Quite.
I see. How did you manage
Dear Captain, your inquiries are becoming tiresome. I want you to be happy. Free yourself of care. Let's enjoy ourselves in the spirit of martial good fellowship.
Come on, let's go. We're getting out of here.
Tut, tut, tut. You're being quite rude. You can't go. Apparently, you need another demonstration of my authority. Yes, quite.
Aye, it's there, Mister Spock. Peaceful as Earth, but how do you explain it?
I don't, Mister Scott. It simply exists. Artificial perhaps, or a freak of nature. The fact remains that life can exist in that area.
Aye, it could, but it couldn't move around much.
Apply a fine tuning on our sensors. Locate any life forms in that stable area.
If we find any, it doesn't follow that it would be our people.
Affirmative. But if the Captain is down there and alive, that's where he'll have to be. We'll attempt to transport up any living beings our sensors detect.
Shooting in the dark, Mister Spock?
Or stand by and do nothing, Mister Scott.
Captain, where could he possibly come from? Who is this maniac?
Better say, what is he? I monitored him, and what I found was unbelievable.
Not alive?
Not in the way we define life. No trace. Zero.
You mean, it shows he's dead?
It doesn't even show that he exists at all, alive or dead.
Notice the wood fire, Captain? Burning steadily, ember bed glowing, and it doesn't give off any heat at all.
Fire without heat, mistaking all this for present day Earth without taking into account the time differential. Whatever we're dealing with, he certainly isn't all knowledgeable. He makes mistakes.
Discussing deep laid plans, I'll wager. I cannot wait to see them evolve.
Trelane, we haven't planned
Tut tut. Do not think that I deplore your martial virtue of deception and stratagem. Quite the contrary. I have nothing but admiration for your whole species.
If your admiration is genuine, you must have respect for our sense of duty too. Our ship has need of us. We have tasks to perform.
Oh, I can't let you go now. I was getting a bit bored until you came. You must stay. I insist.
For how long?
Until this is over, of course.
Until what is over?
Dear Captain, so many questions. Make the most of an uncertain future. Enjoy yourself today. Tomorrow may never come at all.
Trelane, even if we wanted to stay, our companions are missing us.
Yes, I must experience your sense of concern, your grief at the separation.
There are four hundred men and women aboard that ship.
Women? Do you mean that you actually have members of the fairer sex among your crew? Oh, how charming. And they must be all very beautiful. And I shall be so very gallant to them. Here, let me fetch them down at once.
(grabbing his arm) No.
No?
This game has gone on long enough. Those are crucial operating personnel. You can't
I can do anything I want. I should think you would have realised that by now.
Captain, receiving a transporter signal.
Transporter signal? What does he mean? You must tell me!
It means, Trelane, the party's over, thanks to Mister Spock.
(as the group is beamed away) Wait! I won't have this! I haven't dismissed you yet. Stop! I won't have this!
Everyone to stations. Report, Mister Spock. How were our scanners able to penetrate that radiation field?
They didn't, Captain. Not clearly. We merely beamed up all life forms in a given area.
Which means Trelane is not a life form as we know it, or he'd be beaming through now.
Prepare to warp out of here at once. Maximum speed.
(a blonde yeoman) Oh, Captain, I was so worried.
Scotty, we're going to need every ounce of your engines. We're going to put a hundred million miles between us and that madman.
Aye aye, sir.
I'm quaking, but I don't know if it's from laughter or terror.
Doctor, what was it? What was down there?
Well, it was a. Oh, forget it.
Look.
Where are all your weapons, Captain? Don't you display your weapons?
Trelane.
Don't fret, Captain. I'm only a bit upset with you, but this Mister Spock you mentioned, the one responsible for that unseemly, impudent act of taking you from me, which is he?
I am Spock.
Surely not an officer. He isn't quite human, is he?
My father is from the planet Vulcan.
And are its natives predatory?
Not generally. But there have been exceptions.
Really? You will see to his punishment?
On the contrary. I commend his action.
But I don't like him.
Get off my ship.
Oh, rot! You're all going back with me.
We're not going anywhere.
Nonsense. I have an absolutely enchanting sojourn on Gothos planned for all of you, and you shan't spoil it for me. Anyway, the decor of my drawing room is much more appropriate
And tasteful. Don't you agree?
No.
But so much more fitting, honourable sir.
(getting up) You
DeSalle.
Oh, what primitive fury. Why, he's the very soul of sublime savagery.
Trelane, let him go.
We haven't even got our phasers.
Yes, of course. I forget that I shouldn't frighten you too much. But I warn you, you can't provoke me again. Come, everyone. Let's forget your bad manners. Let's be full of merry talk and sallies of wit. We have victuals to delight the palate and brave company to delight the mind. Come, Doctor, do partake. Ah, you've been quite derelict in your social duties, Captain. You haven't introduced me to the charming contingent of your crew.
This is General Trelane.
Retired. But if you prefer, you may address me as the lonely Squire of Gothos, dear ladies.
Lieutenant Uhura of communications.
Ah a Nubian prize. (he kisses her hand) Taken on one of your raids of conquest, no doubt, Captain.
No doubt.
She has the melting eyes of the queen of Sheba. The same lovely colouring. And this. Is this the face that launched a thousand ships and burnt the topless towers of Ilium? Fair Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.
(holding Trelane back) Yeoman Teresa Ross. I believe you have met our science officer Mister Spock.
You do realise, don't you, that it's in deference to the Captain that I brought you here?
Affirmative.
I don't know if I like your tone. It's most challenging. That's what you're doing, challenging me?
I object to you. I object to intellect without discipline. I object to power without constructive purpose.
Oh, Mister Spock, you do have one saving grace after all. You're ill-mannered. The human half of you, no doubt. (to Ross) Ah, come, my little wood nymph. Won't you dance with your swain? (to Uhura) Give us some sprightly music, my dear girl.
I don't know how to play this.
Of course you do.
Captain, how far do we go along with this charade?
Until we can think our way out. Meanwhile, we accept his hospitality.
You should taste his food. Straw would taste better than his meat, and water a hundred times better than his brandy. Nothing has any taste at all.
It may be unappetizing, Doctor, but it is very logical.
There's that magic word again. Does your logic find this fascinating, Mister Spock?
Fascinating is a word I use for the unexpected. In this case, I should think interesting would suffice.
You don't find this unexpected, Mister Spock?
That his food has no taste, his wine no flavour? No. It simply means that Trelane knows all of the Earth forms, but none of the substance.
And if he's fallible, he can't be all powerful. Which means he has something helping him.
Evidently.
A machine? A device? Something which does these things for him.
Ah, my dear, don't we make a graceful pair? Except for one small detail. That dress hardly matches this charming scene.
Ah, yes, that's more what we want. The dashing warrior and his elegant lady.
That mirror. It's part of his audience, his ego. He never wanders from it.
Is it ego, or something else?
Explain.
The mirror.
What about it?
You noted yourself he never gets very far from it. I suppose it could be vanity.
No, no, Mister Spock, that's not the reason. What kind of a machine could do these things?
A machine with the ability to turn energy into matter guided by thought waves. It would have a very complex memory bank, and would be extremely sophisticated.
I think not. A device capable of keeping out this planet's natural atmosphere would be immense.
Good. I agree. That leaves me free
If I'm not mistaken, Mister Spock, I think I can turn his lights off at the source. (raises his voice) Don't be too upset by what you see, gentlemen. After all, his actions are those of an immature, unbalanced mind.
I overheard that remark, Captain. I'm afraid I'll have to dispense with you.
You only heard part of it. I just started.
Oh?
Yes. I want you to leave my crewmen alone. I want you to leave my crewwomen alone too. (to Ross) You're not to dance with him. I don't like it.
Does it actually make you angry, Captain?
(removing one of her long gloves) I don't want you accepting his gifts, either.
Captain, please don't do this.
Well, I do believe the dear Captain is jealous of me.
I don't care what you believe, just keep your hands off her!
Oh, how curiously human. How wonderfully barbaric.
I've had enough of your insulting attentions to her.
Of course you have. After all, that's the root of the matter, isn't it? You fight for the attention, the admiration, the possession of women.
If it's fighting that you want, (slaps Trelane) you may have it.
Are you challenging me to a duel?
If you have the courage.
Oh, this is better than I'd planned. I shall not shirk an affair of honour.
A matched set. Just like the pair that slew your heroic Alexander Hamilton. And Captain, I never miss.
Oh, how fascinating. I'm party to an actual human duel.
Are you ready?
Quite ready, sir. We shall test each other's courage and then, and then we shall see.
Enough talk. Let's get on with it.
As you will, sir. Honour will be served, eh? Oh, wait! As the one challenged, I claim the first shot.
We shoot together.
It's my game and my rules, but if you need to be persuaded. (aims at Spock)
All right.
Captain.
And now, Captain, how do you have the expression? My fate is in your hands.
You've ruined everything!
The machine.
Captain, subspace interference is clearing.
Try to contact the ship.
Oh, the remarkable treachery of the species.
Go on, Trelane. Look at it. It's over. Your power is blanked out. You're finished.
You've earned my wrath. Go back. Go back to your ship, all of you, and prepare. You're all dead men. You especially, Captain.
Trelane! Everyone, we're getting out of here. Now. This is the Captain. Commence beaming up. Maximum speed.
Set course for Colony Beta Six.
Laid in, sir.
Full power acceleration from orbit, Mister Scott.
Full power, sir.
Emergency warp at the earliest possible moment, Mister Sulu.
Standing by to warp, sir.
Shall I make a full report to Spacefleet Command, sir?
Not yet. They may trace our beam. Wait until we're well out of range.
Can we know his range is, Captain?
We can take an educated guess. At the point we entered their solar system.
Still no sign of pursuit. Instruments clear, sir.
Good.
May I take a moment to change?
Yes, I think you might. Turn in your glass slippers. The ball is over.
Gladly, Captain.
Hard to believe it ever happened.
Captain, we're about to warp.
Large body ahead.
Collision course.
Hard to port, Mister Sulu.
That was the planet Gothos, Captain.
Gothos? Mister Sulu, have we been going in circles?
No, sir. All instruments show on course.
Gothos again, Captain.
Hard over, Mister Sulu.
Cat and mouse game.
With us as the mouse.
There it is again. Dead ahead.
Ninety degrees to starboard, Mister Sulu.
Turning, Captain. Nut not veering off from it.
Ninety degrees sub-port, Mister Sulu. Adjust.
Turn completed, and still accelerating toward the planet.
Or it toward us.
Decelerate into orbit. Prepare transporter room.
Captain, you're not beaming down.
Yes, I am, Doctor McCoy. I am going to see our playful Mister Trelane and whatever it takes to make him give up our ship. Stand by communications. Mister Spock. If you don't receive a message from me within the hour, leave the vicinity at once. No turning back.
The prisoner may approach the bench.
Trelane.
Any attempt at demonstrations will weigh against you with the court, and this time my instrumentality is unbreakable.
I've had enough of your games.
Oh, the absurdity of these inferior beings. (reading from the charge sheet) And now, Captain James Kirk, you stand accused of the high crime of treason against a superior authority, conspiracy, and the attempt to foment insurrection. How do you plead?
I haven't come to plead in your court, Trelane.
I warn you. Anything you might say has already been taken down in evidence against you.
I've come for one purpose. To get back my ship.
Irrelevant.
We've made you angry with our will to survive, haven't we?
Uncalled for.
Then vent your anger on me alone. I was the one who led the others. I was the one who shot out your mirror machine.
And did you really think that was the only medium of instrumentality at my command?
I took that chance. I'm willing to pay the price for chancing wrong.
Oh, then you do admit to the charge?
Yes, anything! Just allow the Enterprise to continue its journey. You pompous
Immaterial!
Those people have done you no harm.
Inadmissible!
We're living beings, not playthings for your amusement.
Silence! This trial is over. You are guilty. On all counts, you are guilty. And according to your own laws, this court has no choice in fixing punishment. You will hang by the neck, Captain, until you are dead, dead, dead!
Until a moment ago, I didn't think it possible, but it was. (takes off his robes and wig) I did it. I was angry. I actually experienced genuine rage. This experiment has been successful.
I'm glad you weren't disappointed.
Why, Captain, you're still angry. Would that I could have sustained that moment. Ah, no matter. Do you have a last request?
Trelane, if you think I'm going to cheerfully and obediently stick my head in that noose
You still haven't learned. You have no choice. Oh, this is becoming quite tiresome. It's all so very easy.
That's your problem, Trelane. Everything is easy. It's given you a bad habit. You're not aware of it, but you have it. You don't think, Trelane. That's your problem. You miss opportunities, like your anger before and mine right now. Oh, you enjoy it, but you couldn't have accomplished it without me, and you know why? Because you're a bumbling, inept fool.
Take care, now.
Here you have an opportunity to experience something really unique, and you're wasting it. You want to commit murder? Go ahead, but where's the sport in a simple hanging?
The sport?
Yes. The terror of murder. The suspense. The fun.
Oh, I'm intrigued. Go ahead, Captain. What do you suggest?
A personal conflict between us. Not like the duel before, but the real thing. The stakes, a human life. Mine.
(waving a sword around) Yes! Yes!
That's the idea.
Oh, then you approve?
Yes, but you can do better than that. There's still not enough sport in just killing me with a sword.
I know. That will be dull. We'll have to have something more fanciful. Let me see. A hunt. A royal hunt. Predator against predator. Now, you may go hide in the forest anywhere you like and I shall seek. How does that strike you, Captain?
It strikes me very well. But you'll have to make it worth my while, Trelane. Why not up the stakes?
The stakes?
Yes. While we're playing our game, free my ship. Let it continue on its way. In return, I'll give you a contest you'll remember.
Always back to your ship. Oh well. If it will add spice to the pursuit, I accept your terms, Captain.
Remember, you must try not to let me find you too quickly.
Let me notify the Enterprise that it can go.
At your convenience.
Ah-ha!
Ah ha! Captain Kirk. You must try harder, Captain. This is too easy.
Enterprise. Enterprise, can you hear me?
Touche, Captain. Touche. I must confess you scored first. But after all, I never played this game before.
And now let's have at it again!
Enterprise. Enterprise.
Ah-ha! Tallyho! (iron grids pen Kirk in) You made a noble fight of it, Captain.
Remember, Trelane. You promised to let my ship go.
Yes, but this is such sport. I must fetch all the others back to play. So this is victory. It has a sweet taste. Down, Captain. On your knees!
You haven't won, Trelane.
I have. I could run you through!
But you haven't won anything.
On your knees, Captain!
No! Does it still taste as sweet?
I order you. You've been beaten.
But I'm not defeated.
I order you! I order you! (Kirk disarms him and snaps the sword across his knee) You broke it! You broke my sword!
You've got a lot to learn about winning, Trelane.
You dare to defy me!
In fact, you've got a lot to learn about everything, haven't you?
I'll fix you for that! You cheated! You haven't played the game right. I'll show you!
Trelane.
No! No. You said I could have this planet.
This has gone far enough.
You always stop me when I'm having fun.
You're disobedient and cruel. We've told you before.
Time to come in now, Trelane.
But I don't want to come in, and I won't. I'm a general, and I won't listen to you.
Enough, Trelane. Come along.
But why? I didn't do anything wrong. I was just playing.
We said, come along.
But I haven't finished studying my predators yet.
This is not studying them.
If you cannot take proper care of your pets, you cannot have them at all.
Oh, but I was winning. I was winning.
They're beings, Trelane. They have spirit. They're superior.
No, no. You saw.
You'll grow up, Trelane. You'll understand. Now come along.
Oh, but you said I could. You promised. I never have any fun.
Stop that nonsense at once, or you'll not be permitted to make any more planets.
Oh, but you saw. I was winning. I would have won. Honest.
No, Trelane.
No, Trelane.
I would have. I would have. I would have. I would. I would. I would. I would.
Captain, we regret that the life paths of yourself and your companions have been disturbed.
Who are you? Who is Trelane?
You must forgive our child. The fault is ours for indulging him too much. He will be punished.
We would not have let him intercept you had we realised your vulnerability.
Forgive us, Captain. We will maintain your life-support conditions while you return to your ship. Please accept our apologies.
Captain to Enterprise. Captain to Enterprise.
Captain, we're receiving you.
Beam me up, Mister Spock. We're free to go.
Warping down, Captain. Our warp factor four.
Approach channels clear, Captain.
Colony Beta Six clears us for normal approach, sir.
Normal orbit approach procedures, Mister Sulu.
Captain.
Mister Spock. Still thinking about Trelane, is that it?
For the record, how do we describe him? Pure mentality? Force of intellect? Embodied energy? Superbeing? He must be classified, sir.
God of war, Mister Spock.
I hardly find that fitting.
Then a small boy, and a very naughty one at that.
It will make a strange entry in the library banks.
Then he was a very strange small boy. One the other hand, he was probably doing things comparable to the same mischievous pranks you played when you were a boy.
Mischievous pranks, Captain?
Yes. Dipping little girls' curls in inkwells. Stealing apples from the neighbours' trees. Tying cans on
Forgive me, Mister Spock. I should have known better.
I shall be delighted, Captain.
Arena
You'll enjoy Commodore Travers. He sets a good table.
I wonder if he brought his personal chef along with him to Cestus Three.
Probably. Rank hath its privileges.
How well we both know that.
Scotty. Kirk here.
Good, Commodore. We're on our way.
We'll beam down immediately, Commodore. Kirk out.
Captain. I wonder why he's insistent that our tactical aides come down.
This colony is isolated, exposed, out on the edge of now here. He probably wants additional advice.
Perhaps, Captain, but nevertheless
Spock, isn't it enough the commodore is famous for his hospitality? I, for one, could use a good non-reconstituted meal.
Doctor, you are a sensualist.
You bet your pointed ears I am. Ready whenever you are, Captain.
Energise.
Kirk to Enterprise. Red alert.
What is it, Captain?
Cestus Three has been destroyed.
Full alert. Tricorder readings, Mister Spock. Life detection.
Those messages we got, Captain, the one directing us here yesterday.
Faked. All this happened several days ago. (to a man in a yellow shirt) Lang, over there. Look for survivors. Kelowitz, (blue shirt) that way. (to the red shirt) O'Herlihy, stick with me.
Captain, impulses that direction. Very weak, possibly a survivor.
Come on, Bones.
Captain, over there.
Careful, careful. Shock, radiation burns, internal injuries for certain. He's in a bad way, Captain.
Keep him alive, Bones. I want to know what's been happening here.
Getting another life reading, Captain.
Survivors?
Not survivors. Not warm-blooded. Living creatures, but not human.
Where?
Azimuth ninety three degrees, range one five seven zero yards.
O'Herlihy.
Cover! Kirk to Enterprise, lock on transporters. Beam us up.
Captain, we're coming under attack. Unidentified ship quartering in.
We can't beam you up. I've just rigged up defensive screens.
Keep those screens up. Fire all phasers.
Firing phasers, Captain. The alien has screens up, too.
Take all action necessary to protect the ship. We'll hold out here.
Are you under attack, Captain?
We could drop screens.
Keep those screens up. Worry about us when the ship is safe.
Kirk out.
If they lower those screens to beam us up, they'll be open to phaser attack.
We're hopelessly outnumbered here, Captain. It's those disruptors versus our hand phasers.
We're stuck with it, Mister Spock. We'll have to make do with what we've got.
Kelowitz, Lang, flank out. Lay down fire on co-ordinates Mister Spock gave you. Even if you don't see them. Keep your heads down.
We're helpless down here. And the Enterprise
Sulu is an experienced combat officer.
It's my ship, Mister Spock. I should be there. We can't even get at them.
Nor can they at us at the moment. Not unless they moved their original position. That intervening high ground.
Can you remember the layout of this place? The arsenal?
About one hundred yards in that direction. But after an attack as thorough as this one
I'll risk it.
Kirk here. Report.
Captain, are you all right?
Never mind about me. What about the ship?
We returned fire with all phaser banks. Negative against its deflector screen.
Arm your photon torpedoes.
Aye, aye, sir. Arm photon torpedoes. Stand by.
Any identification on the attacking vessel?
No, sir. Doesn't correspond with any configuration we're familiar with.
We can't get visual contact. She's too far away.
Mister Sulu, photon torpedoes locked on.
Photon torpedoes locked on, Captain.
All banks fired, sir.
Sulu. Sulu, our communications are being interfered with. (An explosion makes him run further on into an old bomb crater) Now get this straight.
You do anything you think necessary to protect the ship. Leave orbit, maximum warp, anything. Clear?
Clear, Captain, but you
Never mind about me. Protect my ship!
Yes, sir. Photon torpedoes negative, Captain. I'm warping out of orbit.
Good. Contact me when you can. Kirk out.
How is he, Doctor?
He'll be dead in half an hour if we don't get him some decent care.
They're moving. I've got to get to the Captain.
Locked on to the enemy, Captain. They're moving toward the high ground. (fizzing sound and smoke) They've locked on to my tricorder.
Very ingenious. They fed back my own impulses and built up an overload.
We'll see how ingenious they are. Here, give me a hand with this grenade launcher. Lang!
Any word from the Enterprise?
Sulu's taken her out of orbit.
They got Lang, sir.
Did you see them?
No, sir.
An evaluation, Mister Kelowitz. Where do you think they are?
If I were them, I'd go to the high ground on the right. I make it twelve hundred yards, azimuth eighty seven. It's pretty close for one of these little jewels, Captain.
It'll be a lot closer to them. Stand clear.
Kirk here.
Captain, the alien's withdrawing. She's at extreme range, but our sensors indicate she just activated her transporters.
Lock on to the alien, Mister Sulu. I don't want to lose her.
Aye, aye, sir. Our screens are down. We can beam you up now, sir.
I want a search party of thirty medical personnel beamed down immediately to search for survivors. Notify the transporter room. Lock onto us. We're beaming up.
Aye, aye, sir.
Can you tell me what happened?
Scanners reported a ship approaching. We get them now and then. They're all welcome to use our facilities. You know that.
Yes, I know.
They came in space normal speed, using our regular approach route, but they knocked out our phaser batteries with their first salvo. From then on we were helpless. We weren't expecting anything! Why should we? We didn't have anything anyone would want.
Easy. Easy.
They poured it on, like, like phasers, only worse, whatever they were using. I tried to signal them. We called up. Tried to surrender. We had women and children. I told them that! I begged them! They wouldn't listen. They didn't let up for a moment.
Lieutenant, the Enterprise received two messages, ostensibly from Cestus Three. One for the Enterprise to go there, and the other for myself and my tactical crew to beam down to the surface.
They hit us a full day before you got there, Captain. No messages came from us, Captain. Why did they do it? Why? Why did they do it? There has to be a reason. There has to be a reason!
It was a trap. Getting the Enterprise to come to Cestus Three, getting us and our whole crew to come ashore.
Very clever. As to the reason?
The reason is crystal clear. The Enterprise is the only protection in this section of the Federation. Destroy the Enterprise, and everything is wide open.
You allude to invasion, Captain, yet positive proof
I have all the proof I need on Cestus Three.
Not necessarily, sir. Several possible explanations
How can you explain a massacre like that? No, Mister Spock. The threat is clear and immediate. Invasion.
Very well, then. If that's the case, you must make certain that the alien vessel never reaches its home base.
I intend to. If we can keep them in the dark as to our strength, they'll never dare move against us. Captain to helmsman.
Sulu here, sir.
Is the alien still making warp five?
Affirmative, sir.
Initiate warp six.
Affirmative, sir.
Overtake. Phaser banks, lock on to the enemy vessel. Stand by for firing orders. All hands, this is the Captain. We are going into battle. All hands, battle stations. Red alert. I repeat, red alert. This is no drill. This is no drill.
Mister DePaul.
Yes, sir.
Position.
Twenty two point three parsecs beyond latest chart limit, sir.
All scanners lock into computer banks. I want a complete record of this. Mister Spock, what do we have on this general area?
Virtually nothing, Captain. No records of any explorations. There are rumours of certain strange signals on subspace channels. However, none has ever been recorded.
Anything on intelligent life forms?
Nothing specific, Captain. Unscientific rumours only. More like space legends.
Mister Sulu, status, alien vessel.
They must be aware we're after them, sir. They've gone to warp six also.
Warp factor seven.
Aye, aye, sir.
Something the matter, Mister Spock?
A sustained warp seven speed will be dangerous, Captain.
Thank you, Mister Spock. I mean to catch them.
We'll either catch them or blow up, Captain. They may be faster than we are.
They'll have to prove it. Yes, Mister Spock?
You mean to destroy the alien ship, Captain?
Of course.
I thought perhaps the hot pursuit alone might be sufficient. Destruction might be unnecessary.
Colony Cestus Three has been obliterated, Mister Spock.
The destruction of the alien vessel will not help that colony, Jim.
If the aliens go unpunished, they'll be back, attacking other Federation installations.
I merely suggested that a regard for sentient life
There's no time for that. It's a matter of policy. Out here, we're the only policemen around. And a crime has been committed. Do I make myself clear?
Very clear, Captain.
I'm delighted, Mister Spock. Report, Mister Sulu.
Alien ship maintaining interval, Captain. Now at warp seven.
Warp factor eight.
Aye, aye, sir.
Captain to phaser banks. All components at battle ready. All banks primed.
Aft phaser to Bridge. Alert status. All weapons at operational ready.
Captain.
Yes, Mister Sulu.
Closing on target, sir.
Good. Mister DePaul.
Yes, sir.
Our position.
Two two seven nine pl, sir. Uncharted solar system at two four six six pm.
Is it on the alien's course?
No, sir. He's headed away from it.
Captain, sensors report we're being scanned.
By the alien ship?
No, sir. It's from that solar system ahead.
Any interference? Resistance?
No, sir, Just scanning beams. It's on an unusual wave length.
Mister Spock?
It would appear someone is curious about us.
Mister Sulu, is the alien still heading away from that solar system?
Yes, sir. We're closing, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, anything further on those scanning beams?
There's no hostility, sir. They're not tractors or weapons of any sort, Just increasing in intensity. Steady. Regular. It's growing stronger, sir.
Captain!
Yes, what is it?
The alien. It's slowing down. Warp five, four, two. It's going sublight, sir. Sir? It's stopped dead in space.
He may be turning to fight.
No, sir. They're just dead out there.
Are you sure?
Yes, sir. Unmoving.
Then we've got them. Go to Red Alert. Prepare to fire phaser banks. Sensors, lock on. Mister Sulu, continue closing. Mister Spock, lock phasers into computer. Computers will control attack.
Computer lock ready, Captain. All systems standing by.
Range is one eight one zero. One seven six zero. Range is one seven zero zero. One six four zero. Range is one five nine zero. One five five zero and closing, sir.
From warp eight? Have you lost your mind?
Same as the alien, Captain.
Mister Scott, report.
We're dead, Captain. Locked up. Frozen tight. All propulsion systems read zero.
They're all normal, sir. Atmosphere, heat, light. No variance.
Phaser banks. Report.
We're all inoperative here, Captain. No power at all. No faulty circuits I can find. Just no power.
Damage Control, report.
All systems report normal, Captain. No ascertainable damage.
I don't know, sir, but whatever it is, we canna move.
We're being held in place, Captain, apparently from that solar system.
We are being held.
Tractor beam?
No, sir. An unidentifiable power.
We are the Metrons. You are one of two crafts which have come into our space on a mission of violence. This is not permissible. Yet we have analysed you and have learned that your violent tendencies are inherent. So be it. We will control them. We will resolve your conflict in the way most suited to your limited mentalities. Captain James Kirk.
This is Kirk.
We have prepared a planet with a suitable atmosphere. You will be taken there, as will the Captain of the Gorn ship which you have been pursuing. There you will settle your dispute.
I don't understand.
What makes you think you can interfere with
It is you who are interfering. We are simply putting a stop to it. The place we have prepared for you contains sufficient elements for either of you to construct weapons lethal enough to destroy the other, which seems to be your intention. The winner of the contest will be permitted to go his way unharmed. The loser, along with his ship, shall be destroyed in the interests of peace. The contest will be one of ingenuity against ingenuity, brute strength against brute strength. The results will be final.
Just a minute
There will be no discussion. It is done.
He's gone.
The Enterprise is dead in space, stopped cold during her pursuit of an alien raider by mysterious forces, and I have been somehow whisked off the bridge and placed on the surface of an asteroid, facing the Captain of the alien ship. Weaponless, I face the creature the Metrons called a Gorn. Large, reptilian. Like most humans, I seem to have an instinctive revulsion to reptiles. I must fight to remember that this is an intelligent, highly advanced individual, the Captain of a starship, like myself, undoubtedly a dangerously clever opponent.
Have you tried overload?
Aye, sir. It does no good.
How about bypassing the transformer banks? Feed the impulse engines directly.
I tried that, sir. Nothing.
Lieutenant Uhura, have sensors learned anything about the nature of the force which holds us here?
No, sir. They report they definitely emanate from that solar system ahead.
No indication of its composition? Gravimetric? Magnetic? Electronic?
Nothing, sir.
This is Captain James Kirk of the Starship Enterprise. Who ever finds this please get it to Starfleet Command. I'm engaged in personal combat with a creature apparently called a Gorn.
He's immensely strong. Already he has withstood attacks from me that would have killed a human being. Fortunately, though strong, he is not agile. The agility and, I hope, the cleverness, is mine.
The Metrons, the creatures that sent us both here, said that the surface of the planet provides the raw material to construct weapons. There's very little here. Scrub brush, rocks, an abundance of mineral deposits, but no weapons in the conventional sense. Still, I need to find one. Bare-handed against the Gorn, I have no chance.
Leave channel one open, Lieutenant, just in case.
Aye, aye, sir.
What are you going to do, Mister Spock?
I'm going to wait, Doctor. There's little else I can do.
What about the Captain?
If I could help him, I would. I cannot.
Now, you're the one that's always talking about logic. What about some logic now? Where's the Captain, Mister Spock?
He's out there, Doctor. Out there somewhere in a thousand cubic parsecs of space, and there's absolutely nothing we can do to help him.
A large deposit of diamonds on the surface. Perhaps the hardest substance known in the universe. Beautifully crystallized and pointed, but too small to be useful as a weapon. An incredible fortune in stones yet I would trade them all for a hand phaser, or a good solid club. Yet the Metrons said there would be weapons, if I could find them. Where? What kind?
This is the U.S.S. Enterprise calling the Metrons. Our channels are open. Come in, please. We urgently desire a conference. Please answer.
This may be my last entry. I am almost exhausted. Unless I find the weapon the Metron mentioned I have very little time left. Native sulphur, diamonds. This place is a mineralogist's dream. Yet there is something about sulphur. Something very old. Something? If only I could remember.
The ship, our engines, our weapons. It's just inconceivable that we are immobilised.
But it has happened, Doctor.
We are the Metrons. Your Captain is losing his battle. We would suggest you make whatever memorial arrangements, if any, which are customary in your culture. We believe you have very little time left.
We appeal to you in the name of civilisation. Put a stop to this.
Your violent intent and actions demonstrate that you are not civilised. However, we are not without compassion. It is possible you may have feelings toward your Captain. So that you will be able to prepare yourself, we will allow you to see and hear what is now transpiring.
If there were only some way we could contact him.
Yes, indeed, Doctor, if only there were. Notice the substance encrusting that rock. Yes. Unless I'm mistaken, it's potassium nitrate.
So?
Perhaps nothing, Doctor. (Kirk tastes the mineral and spits it out) Perhaps everything.
Who is this, the Metron?
This is your opponent, Earthling. I have heard every word you have said.
All right. What do you want?
I'm weary of the chase. Wait for me. I shall be merciful and quick.
Like you were at Cestus Three?
You were intruding! You established an outpost in our space.
You butchered helpless human beings
We destroyed invaders, as I shall destroy you!
Can that be true? Was Cestus Three an intrusion on their space?
It may well be possible, Doctor. We know very little about that section of the galaxy.
Then we could be in the wrong.
Perhaps. That is something best decided by diplomats.
The Gorn simply might have been trying to protect themselves.
Yes.
Fascinating. Good. Good. (Kirk cuts vines to length against a rock) He knows, Doctor. He has reasoned it out.
Yes. Yes.
What is it, Spock?
What's he doing?
What force?
Recall your basic chemistry, Doctor. Gunpowder.
Captain, let us be reasonable.
You have lost. Admit it to yourself. Stop running.
Can he do it?
If he has the time, Doctor. If he has the time.
No. No, I won't kill you. Maybe you thought you were protecting yourself when you attacked the outpost.
No, I won't kill him! Do you hear? You'll have to get your entertainment someplace else!
You're a Metron?
Does my appearance surprise you, Captain?
You seem more like a boy.
I am approximately fifteen hundred of your Earth years old. You surprise me, Captain.
How?
By sparing your helpless enemy who surely would have destroyed you, you demonstrated the advanced trait of mercy, something we hardly expected. We feel there may be hope for your kind. Therefore, you will not be destroyed. It would not be civilised.
What happened to the Gorn?
I sent him back to his ship. If you like, I shall destroy him for you.
No. That won't be necessary. We can talk. Maybe reach an agreement.
Very good, Captain. There is hope for you. Perhaps in several thousand years, your people and mine shall meet to reach an agreement. You are still half savage, but there is hope. We will contact you when we are ready.
Captain! Are you all right?
I don't know. I don't know. All right, everybody. Back to your posts. Let's get out of here.
Captain.
Mister Sulu.
It's impossible, but there's Sirius over there when it should be here. And Canopus. And Arcanis. We're. All of a sudden, we're clear across the galaxy, five hundred parsecs from where we are I mean, were. I mean
Don't try and figure it out, Mister Sulu. Just plot a course for us back to Cestus Three.
Aye, aye, sir.
After you touched off your primitive cannon, Captain, we lost the picture the Metron was sending us.
Most of it. I would be interested in knowing what finally happened.
We're a most promising species, Mister Spock, as predators go. Did you know that?
I've frequently had my doubts.
I don't. Not anymore. And maybe in a thousand years or so, we'll be able to prove it. Never mind, Mister Spock. It doesn't make much sense to me either. Take us back to where we're supposed to be, Mister Sulu. Warp factor one.
Warp factor one.
A thousand years, Captain?
Tomorrow is Yesterday
(the radar operator) Captain.
What is it, Webb?
A blip, sir. Just came on the screen.
How do you read it?
Aircraft of some sort. By the size of it and the speed, it's not one of ours, sir. It doesn't even read like anything I've ever seen.
What was the approach?
None, sir. It was just there, like it fell out of the sky or something.
(suddenly interested) Current position?
Directly over the Omaha installation, sir. Holding there.
Watch the scope, Webb. Air Defence will want to send somebody up for a closer look. We may have a real UFO on our hands.
Mister Spock.
Except for secondary systems, everything is out, sir. We're on impulse power only.
Auxiliaries?
If Mister Scott is still with us, auxiliaries should be on momentarily. (Uhura is just stirring on the floor) Are you all right, Lieutenant?
Mister Scott is still with us.
This is the Captain. Damage control parties on all decks, check in. All departments tie in with the record computer. Report casualties and operational readiness to the First Officer. Kirk out. Lieutenant Uhura, contact Starfleet Control. I want them alerted to the position of that black star that's in the area of Starbase 9.
Yes, sir.
Captain? Casualty reports indicate only minor injuries. Engineering reports warp engines non-operational. Mister Scott overrode the automatic helm setting and is holding us in orbit on impulse power.
Orbit where?
Earth, Captain. We were on a general course in this direction when we were pulled in by the star. Apparently the breakaway threw us on in the same direction.
Screen on.
We are too low in the atmosphere to retain this orbit, Captain. Engineering reports we have sufficient impulse power to achieve escape velocity.
Give us some altitude, Mister Sulu.
Yes, sir. Helm answering. She's sluggish, sir.
Captain, normal Starfleet channel has nothing but static. I'm getting something on another frequency, but it's not Starfleet.
Put it on audio.
This is the five thirty news summary. Cape Kennedy. The first manned Moon shot is scheduled for Wednesday, six am Eastern Standard Time. All three astronauts who are to make this historic
Manned Moon shot? That was in the late 1960s.
Apparently, Captain, so are we.
What?
Whiplash propelled us into a time warp, Captain. Backward. Exact chronometer readings in a few moments.
Captain, I'm getting ground to air transmission.
Verified. Scanners report some type of craft approaching from below us. Under cloud cover and closing.
Bluejay 4, this is Blackjack. We're tracking you and the UFO.
I have him on my screen. Following.
Mister Sulu, can you gain altitude faster? I want to outdistance him.
Picking up, sir, but she's still slow in responding.
Blackjack, this is Bluejay 4. UFO is picking up speed and climbing. I'm going in closer.
Bluejay 4, you should be close enough for visual contact.
I can see it now. Whatever this is, it's big. Two cylindrical projections on top, one below. Purpose undetermined.
We have two flights scrambled and on the way. They should rendezvous in your sector in two minutes.
I won't be here. The UFO's climbing away fast.
Bluejay 4, you are ordered to close on the UFO. and attempt to force him to land. We want it brought down or at least disabled until the other planes arrive.
Acknowledged. Closing on target.
Positive identification, Captain. Aircraft is an interceptor, equipped with missiles, possibly armed with nuclear warheads. If he hits us with one, he might damage us severely, perhaps beyond our capacity to repair under current circumstances.
Scotty, activate tractor beam. Lock onto that aircraft and hold it out there.
Captain, this type of aircraft might be too fragile to take our tractor beam.
Tractor beam on, sir. We have the target.
Aircraft is breaking up, Captain.
Scanning area, sir.
Try and beam that pilot aboard. Take over, Mister Spock.
Welcome aboard the Enterprise.
You speak English.
That's right. You can step off the transporter
Captain John Christopher, United States Air Force. Serial number 4857932.
Relax, Captain, you're among friends. I'm Captain James T. Kirk.
What's going on here? Where am I? What happened? You people, who are you?
All in good time, Captain. Meanwhile, let me apologise for bringing you aboard the ship so abruptly, but it couldn't be helped. I didn't know that your craft couldn't stand up to our tractor beam.
Don't give me any double-talk. Just tell me who you are.
We'll tell you what we decide to tell you in a few moments. In the meantime, relax. You're our guest. I have a feeling you'll find it interesting.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here. What is it, Mister Spock?
The aircraft has completely broken up, Captain. Shall we turn off the tractor beam?
Affirmative. We have the pilot aboard. I'll be right up. Kirk out. Follow me.
Morning. (drags Christopher along) Captain.
A woman?
Crewman.
Bridge.
Must have taken quite a lot to build a ship like this.
There are only twelve like it in the fleet.
I see. Did the Navy
We're a combined service, Captain. Our authority is the United Earth Space Probe Agency.
United Earth?
This is very difficult to explain. We're from your future. A time warp placed us here. It was an accident.
You seem to have a lot of them. However, I can't deny the fact that you're here. With this ship.
I never have believed in little green men.
Neither have I.
Captain Christopher, this is my First Officer, Lieutenant Commander Spock.
Captain.
Feel free to look around, Captain. Don't touch anything, but I think you'll find it interesting.
Interesting is a word and a half for it, Captain.
We've achieved a stable orbit out of Earth's atmosphere. Our deflectors are operative, enough to prevent our being picked up again as a UFO. And Mister Scott wishes to speak to you about the engines.
Very well, Mister Spock. Anything else on your mind?
Captain Christopher.
What about him?
We cannot return him to Earth, Captain. He already knows too much about us and is learning more. I do not specifically refer to Captain Christopher, but suppose an unscrupulous man were to gain certain knowledge of man's future? Such a man could manipulate key industries, stocks, and even nations. and in so doing, change what must be. And if it is changed, Captain, you and I and all that we know might not even exist.
Your logic can be most annoying.
That flight suit must be uncomfortable. (to Spock) Why don't you have the quartermaster issue him something more suitable? Then I want to meet you and him in my quarters.
Yes, sir.
Computer on. Record.
(in a low, breathy voice) Recording.
Come.
Captain's log, supplemental. Engineering Officer Scott informs warp engines damaged, but can be made operational and reenergised.
Computed and recorded, dear.
Computer, you will not address me in that manner. Compute.
Computed, dear.
Mister Spock, I ordered this computer and its interlinking systems repaired.
I have investigated it, Captain. To correct the fault will require an overhaul of the entire computer system and a minimum of three weeks at a Starbase.
I wouldn't mind so much if it didn't get so affectionate.
It also has an unfortunate tendency to giggle.
I take it that a lady computer is not routine.
We put in at Cygnet Fourteen for general repair and maintenance. Cygnet Fourteen is a planet dominated by women. They seemed to feel the ship's computer system lacked a personality. They gave it one. Female, of course.
Well, you people certainly have interesting problems. I'd love to stay around to see how your girlfriend works out, but 
I'm afraid you'll have to. We can't send you back.
Can't? Spock here told me that your transporter can beam down an object even from an orbit this high.
It's not the transporter. It's you. You know what the future looks like. If anybody else finds out, they could change the course of it, destroy it.
Well then my disappearance would change something, too.
I have run a computer check on all historical tapes. They show no record of any relevant contribution by John Christopher.
Look, Captain, I don't buy all your time accident story. The experts can figure out who you are and what you are. It's my duty to report what I've seen. Well, what would you do?
I'd report, If I could. We can't take the risk.
I don't want to know about risks. I have a wife, two children. What about them?
I'm sorry.
Engine room to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
What is it, Scotty?
Progress report, sir. Everything's jury-rigged, but we're coming along with the repairs. We could re-energise in about four hours, but
But what, Scotty?
Well sir, as I say, the engines are being repaired, but we've no place to go in this time. If you, if you see what I mean?
Sir?
Yes, Scotty. Carry on.
Too bad, Captain. Maybe I can't go home, but neither can you. You're as much a prisoner in time as I am.
Recommendation for his disposition, dear?
Maintenance note. My recording computer has a serious malfunction. Recommend it either be corrected or scrapped. Compute.
(petulant) Computed.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Have some new information regarding Captain Christopher. Important I see you both immediately.
Yes, Mister Spock. Report to my quarters. I'll contact Captain Christopher.
Yes, sir. Bridge out.
Captain Christopher. Captain Christopher? Security, this is the Captain.
Security Chief here, sir.
All right. Nice and easy. Now I'm going to step into that thing, and you're going to transport me back to Earth.
Well, Jim, with the exception of a slight bruise or two, our Captain is as healthy as a proverbial horse. He'll be coming out of it in a minute or two.
He tried to escape. I know how he feels, but I can't send him back with what he knows.
Jim, what if we can't go back? What do we do, sit up here and wait for our supplies to run out, our power to die? It has to eventually, you know. We certainly can't go back to Earth. It would be worse than the Captain being returned. There are four hundred and thirty of us, and that means four hundred and thirty chances of altering the future.
Yes. But we're not in that position yet.
I'm glad to hear it.
And if we do get back to where we belong, then he won't belong. We're roughly about the same age, but in our society he'd be useless. Archaic.
Maybe he could be retrained, reeducated.
Now you're sounding like Spock.
If you're going to get nasty, I'm going to leave.
Could he be retrained to forget his family? His children?
The answer to that is no.
You all right?
Yeah. I see physical training is required in your service, too.
Crude methods, but effective.
What does he mean by that?
It's just a joke, Captain.
You said you had some additional information, Mister Spock?
I made an error in my computations.
Oh? This could be an historic occasion.
I find that we must return Captain Christopher to Earth after all.
Why? You said I made no relative contribution.
Poor choice of words on my part. I neglected, in my initial run-through, to correlate the possible contributions by offspring. I find, after running a crosscheck on that factor, that your son Colonel Shaun Geoffrey Christopher headed, or will head, the first successful Earth-Saturn probe, which is a rather significant
Wait a minute. I don't have a son.
You mean yet.
The doctor is correct. Unless we return Captain Christopher to Earth, There will be no Colonel Shaun Geoffrey Christopher to go to Saturn.
Well, that's it, isn't it? We'll have to find some way of
A boy. I'm going to have a son.
Acknowledging that we must return Captain Christopher, there are several problems, prime of which is the explanation of his return. We tracked his plane wreckage down after our tractor beam crushed it. It crashed in an open section of southern Nebraska.
That means those search parties will be crawling all over that wreckage.
And Captain Christopher himself complicated the matter.
When I made visual contact, I turned on my wing cameras. I got close enough to take some pretty clear pictures of you. Air Defence Command will be processing that film fast. And ADC Control was probably recording my radio transmissions.
If I remember my history, these things were being dismissed as weather balloons, sun dogs, explainable things. At least publicly.
Captain, our tractor beam caught and crushed an Air Force plane. It'll be impossible to explain this as anything other than a genuine UFO. Possibly alien, definitely destructive.
What about our problem, Mister Spock? Any ideas on how to get us back to our own time?
A theory. A reverse application of what happened to us. Logically, it could work. Also, logically, there are a hundred variables, any one of which could put us in a worse position than we're in now.
We're going to have to go back and get those reports and photos. If the Captain feels duty bound to report what he saw, there won't be any evidence to support him.
That makes me out to be either a liar or a fool.
Perhaps.
Not at all. You'll simply be one of the thousands who thought he saw a UFO.
Captain, I know that base. I was stationed there a year ago. I'd like to
No, Captain. Thank you, but if anything should go wrong, you might get hurt. We couldn't risk that. Neither could you or your son.
Well, I'd like to help. I could sketch a layout of the place for you. Show you where the record section and the photo lab are.
Primitive computer. I've seen them demonstrated in museums.
Me, too. If this one's like those, it'll make the devil's noise if you start it.
I don't intend to start it.
How long have they been down there now?
Fifteen minutes, twenty eight seconds.
Well, shouldn't they be coming up?
It is a fact, Doctor, that prowling by stealth is more time-consuming than a direct approach. In our case
Shouldn't you be working on your time warp calculations, Mister Spock?
I am.
Hold it. Get your hands up. Now, one at a time, hand me those belts.
And the bag.
It's been too long. Jim should have at least signaled by now.
You may be correct, Doctor. Open communicator channel.
What was that?
What was what?
That noise.
I didn't hear anything.
That noise. It's coming from one of these things.
The emergency signal.
Stay right where you are.
One emergency signal, sir.
Beam up immediately.
Only one signal. What happened?
We'll know in a moment, Doctor.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Spock here. Are you all right, Captain?
Yes, I'm all right, but as you can see, we have another problem.
Your surprise package is an Air Police sergeant from the base.
I want you to keep him in the transporter room. No sense in letting him see more of the ship than is necessary.
I don't believe there'll be trouble in that respect, Captain.
Our guest seems quite satisfied to remain where he is.
Kirk out. (returns to the magnetic tapes) What was the chronometer reading when we first sighted Christopher's jet?
Five thirty in that time zone, maybe a little after.
Put it at the end of these tapes, will you? Get them all.
We'll try the darkroom.
Photo lab.
Yes, that's it. That's all of them. Signal Mister Spock that we're almost ready to beam up. I'll make a check of the files just in case.
Yes, sir.
All right. Where's the other one?
What other one?
Your partner. I saw you looking that was and I saw somebody move in there.
No, no, no. Just me. Besides, could anyone get out of here without your seeing them?
No. Nobody should have been able to.
Your decision to beam up was quite correct, Mister Sulu.
Engine room to Mister Spock.
Spock here.
We've completed re-energising the warp engines, sir. We can re-fire them anytime.
Do so now, engineer. We'll need all power to test our theory.
Aye, sir. Engine room out.
(examining a roll of film) Poor photography.
Blast your theories and observations, Mister Spock. What about Jim? He's down there alone, probably under arrest. He doesn't have a communicator, and we can't locate him or beam him back aboard without one.
I am aware of that, Doctor. This is the first officer. Captain Christopher to the briefing room.
Now, look, Mister. You and I had better start communicating. I want to know how you got in here. That's a simple question. Give me a simple answer. Nobody saw you. You got all the way inside without tripping any alarm. How did you do it?
Believe me, Colonel, you wouldn't believe me.
Don't try to be funny. How did you get in?
I popped in out of thin air.
You seem to think this is some kind of a game.
No, Colonel. I know it's no game.
All right. What did you say your name was?
For the fourth time, my name is James T. Kirk.
And how did you get inside a top security installation, James T. Kirk?
I told you, you wouldn't believe me.
Colonel, would you mind being careful with that?
That worries you a little bit, huh? What is that, a radio? Transmitter of some kind?
Of some kind.
You can be more specific than that, Kirk. I don't like mysteries.
If you don't stop being careless with that, you'll have one. A big one.
I'll have it disassembled and examined. We are not dummies, mister. We know how to find out things we want to know. (tosses it to the guard standing nearby) What is that? Is that a uniform of some kind?
This little thing? Just something I slipped on.
Kirk, maybe you don't realise how serious this is. Sabotage of a government installation
Did I sabotage something?
No. We stopped you in time. But what would you have done if we hadn't found you?
Believe me, Colonel, nothing at all.
Is that what you're here for? Nothing at all?
That's what would have happened if you hadn't interfered.
All right, Kirk. Maybe this will make you laugh. Sabotage, espionage, unauthorised entry, burglary. How are those for starters? And I can think up lots more if you don't start talking.
All right, Colonel. The truth is, I'm a little green man from Alpha Centauri. A beautiful place. You ought to see it.
I am going to lock you up for two hundred years.
That ought to be just about right.
He's probably being held in security section. Even if they've notified the authorities, it'll take a little time for someone to get there.
Quite logical, Captain. Can you give us the co-ordinates to beam down a landing party near those interrogation rooms?
Yes, but you're not going to get them unless you take me with you.
I can't do that, Captain.
If something went wrong
Something's already gone wrong. Of course, you could beam down anywhere inside that base, but it would take time to find him.
Mister Sulu, you and Captain Christopher will beam down with me. The captain will provide the co-ordinates for the transporter chief.
Shall I issue phasers?
One for you, one for me. Set them on heavy stun force.
Yes, sir. (leaves)
You don't trust me, Spock.
In fact, I do. But only to a certain point.
Energise.
Do they do that all the time?
Are you hungry?
Uh-huh.
What would you like?
Maybe some chicken soup.
See what that is, airman.
Yes, I do. What's he doing here?
He knew the exact beam down co-ordinates for this section of the base. It was necessary to bring him along.
I see. No harm done. Mister Sulu, did you check out those tapes?
Mister Spock ran them through. They were the right ones. We got them all.
They know you've been here.
All they have is a mystery and no answers. Mister Sulu, signal the Transporter Chief. Four to beam up.
Yes, sir.
(holding the security guard's gun) Uh-uh. Not me.
Don't be a fool. You know what's at stake.
You bet I do. My family. A son that isn't born yet. You don't have to return me now, Captain. Spock, come out of there.
You can't explain your presence on the base.
I told you it's my duty to report everything I've seen. That's explanation enough. Spock!
You'll go home, Christopher but you'll do it our way.
Over my dead body.
I suspected he might not wish to return with us.
Four to beam up, Mister Sulu.
Yes, sir.
Mister Scott and I both agree that the only possible solution is the slingshot effect, like the one that put us here. My computations indicate that if we fly toward the sun, seek out its magnetic attraction, then pull away at full power, the whiplash will propel us into another time warp.
Slingshot effects are fine for you people. How do you propose to return the Sergeant and me?
Logically, as we move faster and faster toward the sun, we'll begin to move backward in time. We'll actually go back beyond yesterday, beyond the point when we first appeared in the sky. Then, breaking free will shoot us forward in time, and we'll transport you back before any of this happened.
You won't have anything to remember, because it never would have happened.
What if you can't pull free of the sun?
Oh, we'll do that all right, Captain. We'll not be getting so close that my engines couldn't pull us out. What I am worried about, sir, that we may not have much control when we're thrown forward again.
Helm control?
Braking control, sir. If I can't stop us soon enough, we may overshoot our time, and if I stop the engines suddenly the strain may tear us apart. Anyway we do it, it's a mighty rough ride.
Well, gentlemen, we all have to take a chance. Especially if one is all you have. Assume your stations.
Ahead warp factor three, Mister Sulu.
Warp factor three, sir.
I never thought I'd make it into space. I was in line to be chosen for the space programme but I didn't qualify.
Take a good look around, Captain. You made it here ahead of all of them.
Sir, our speed is increasing. We're travelling at over warp eight.
Mister Spock.
Since we've passed Mercury, the sun's pull on us has increased greatly. From here, we'll move even faster. And Captain, notice the chronometers. They've started backward. Minute by minute, the speed of time passage will now increase.
Get your gear. Report to the transporter room. And Captain Christopher, you only have about fifteen years, so you'd better hurry.
Approaching breakaway point. On the countdown. Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Now, Mister Sulu. (the ship lurches sideways) More power, Mister Sulu.
It's maximum now, sir. She's fighting it.
We've broken free and heading back.
Gaining speed now, Captain. We're now at warp four, warp seven. Eight. Off the dial, sir.
Chronometers moving forward again, Captain.
Do you have the chronometer reading and the co-ordinates to return Captain Christopher and the guard?
Computed.
Bridge to transporter room. Captain Christopher.
This is Christopher.
We're coming up on Earth fast, Captain. Are you ready?
Everything A-OK.
Captain, thanks for the look ahead.
Our pleasure, Captain. Bridge out.
Twenty minutes, sir. It'll be close.
Bridge to transporter room. Prepare to energise.
Ten minutes. Nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Energise.
You should be close enough for a visual contact.
Bluejay Four. Can you see it? What is it? Bluejay 4. Come in. We've lost the image.
Blackjack, this is Bluejay Four. I could have sworn there was some kind of ship, but nothing could have moved that fast.
We don't track mirages.
Mark it down as another UFO. Bluejay Four returning to base. Out.
Approaching second beaming, Captain.
Bridge to transporter room, prepare to energise.
Now.
Energise.
Past Pluto, sir.
What's our reading, Mister Spock?
Approaching our century, Captain. Braking should begin now.
Bridge to engineering. Begin full braking power.
Pulling away from the sun weakened them, sir. They may blow apart if I reverse.
No choice, Mister Scott.
Aye, sir.
Fifty years to go.
Engines cutting back, sir. No decrease in speed.
Forty, thirty.
Never mind, Mister Spock.
The engines!
Engine room to Bridge. Engines are on full reverse. They're buckling! Bridge!
Mister Scott is still with us.
Captain.
Open a channel, Uhura.
Frequency open, sir.
Starfleet Control, this is the Enterprise. Captain Kirk speaking.
Record ship arrival, dear.
Starfleet Control, repeating message. The Enterprise is home. Kirk out.
Court Martial
Maintenance Section Eighteen. The section is working on the Intrepid. Reschedule. The Enterprise is on priority one. That makes three times you've read it, Jim. Is there an error?
No. But the death of the crewman.
Regulations, Captain. And the extract from your ship's computer log confirming this sworn deposition?
Kirk to Enterprise.
Bridge here. Go ahead, Captain.
Where's Mister Spock with that computer log extract?
He should have been there ten minutes ago, sir.
Kirk out. 
It's a great pity. The service can't afford to lose men like Lieutenant Commander Finney.
I agree. I waited until the last possible moment. We were on Red Alert. The storm got worse. I had to jettison the pod.
What took you so long, Mister Spock?
Captain, I believe I
I'll take that.
Jamie.
There you are. I just wanted one more look at you. The man who killed my father.
That's not so. He was my friend.
Your friend? You hated him all your life! That's why you killed him, you murderer! You murderer! You murderer!
Mister Spock, would you please?
Miss Finney, come with me, please.
Captain Kirk, you say you jettisoned the pod after the Red Alert?
You have my sworn deposition. 
Then, Captain, I must presume you've committed willful perjury. This extract from your computer log says you jettisoned the pod before going to Red Alert. Consider yourself confined to the base. Official inquiry will determine whether a general court martial is in order.
Timothy, I haven't seen you since the Vulcanian expedition. (no reply) Well, I see our graduating class from the Academy is well represented. Corrigan. Teller. How you doing, Mike?
(Dark hair, red shirt) I understand you're laying over for repairs. Big job?
Couple of days.
You moving out then?
In a hurry to see me go?
Oh, I just wondered how long it'd take to get a new records officer.
You can talk plainer than that.
I can, but I think the point's been made. Ben was a friend of ours.
Come on, Jim. Let's go.
Go on. Finish. Ben was a friend of yours, and
Jim.
Go on. I'm waiting to hear the rest.
What would be the point? You've already made up your minds. Excuse me, Bones.
If you have any doubt, that was indeed Captain James Kirk of the Enterprise.
Yes, I know. Are you a friend of his?
In these trying times, one of the few. Doctor Leonard McCoy. And you? 
Areel Shaw. And I'm a friend, too. An old one.
All of my old friends look like doctors. All of his look like you. Well, you might as well join me for a drink. With this inquiry coming up, he's going to need all the friends he can get.
Recording inquiry. Matter. Captain Kirk, James T. Subject. Circumstances of death, Lieutenant Commander Finney, Benjamin.
This inquiry, to determine whether a general court-martial should be convened against Captain Kirk on charges of perjury and culpable negligence.
Ready.
Let us begin with your relationship with Commander Finney. You knew him for a long time, didn't you? 
Yes. He was an instructor at the Academy when I was a midshipman, but that didn't stand in the way of our beginning a close friendship. His daughter Jamie, who was here last night, was named after me.
It's common knowledge that something happened to your friendship.
It's no secret. We were assigned to the same ship some years later. I relieved him on watch once and found a circuit open to the atomic matter piles that should've been closed. Another five minutes, it could have blown up the ship.
Ship nomenclature. Specify.
United Starship Republic, number 1371.
Continue. 
I closed the switch and logged the incident. He drew a reprimand and was sent to the bottom of the promotion list.
And he blamed you for that?
Yes. He had been at the Academy for an unusually long time as an instructor. As a result, he was late in being assigned to a starship. The delay, he felt, looked bad on his record. My action, he believed, made things worse.
Comment. Service record of Lieutenant Commander Finney to be appended this inquiry.
Noted.
Now let's get into the specifics of the storm, Captain.
Weather scan indicated an ion storm dead ahead. I sent Finney into the pod. 
Why Finney?
His name was at the top of the duty roster.
If he blamed you
He may have blamed me that he never rose to command a ship, but I don't assign jobs on the basis of who blames me. It was Finney's turn, and I assigned him. He had just checked in with me from the pod when we hit the leading edge of the storm. Not too bad at first. I signalled a Yellow Alert. Then we began encountering pressure, variant stress, force seven, the works. I finally signaled a Red Alert. Finney knew he had a matter of seconds. I gave him those seconds and more. But apparently it wasn't enough.
Then why, Captain, does the computer log from your ship, made automatically at the time, indicate that you were still on Yellow Alert when you jettisoned and not on Red?
I don't know. There's been a mistake.
It would seem so. Could the computer be wrong?
Mister Spock is running a survey right now, but the odds are next to impossible.
Stop recording. Now, look, Jim. Not one man in a million could do what you and I have done. Command a starship. A hundred decisions a day, hundreds of lives staked on you making every one of them right. You're played out, Jim. Exhausted.
Is that the way you see it?
That's the way my report'll read if you co-operate.
A physical breakdown. Possibly even mental collapse.
Possibly.
I'd be admitting a man died because
I'm thinking of the service. I won't have it smeared.
By what, Commodore Stone?
All right. By an evident perjurer who's either covering his bad judgment, his cowardice, or
That's as far as you go, sir. I'm telling you I was there on the Bridge. I know what happened. I know what I did.
It's in the transcript, and computer transcripts don't lie. I'm telling you, Captain, either you accept a permanent ground assignment, or the whole disciplinary weight of Starfleet command is going to light right on your neck.
So that's the way we do it now? Sweep it under the rug, and me along with it? Not on your life. I intend to fight.
Then you draw a general court.
Draw it? I demand it. And right now, Commodore Stone. Right now.
Areel. Doctor McCoy said you were here. I should have felt it in the air, like static electricity.
Flattery will get you everywhere.
Four years, seven months, and an odd number of days. Not that I'm counting.
You look marvellous. You haven't changed a bit.
But things have changed for you, haven't they?
Oh, you've heard about that, have you?
I'm a lawyer in the Judge Advocate's office, remember?
I remember. Let's forget it. We have a lot of lost time to make up for.
You're taking it very lightly.
The confidence of an innocent man.
Are you? That's not what the rumours indicate.
Look, Let's not talk shop.
Jim, this could ruin you. Will you take some advice?
I never could talk you into anything. All right. Fire away.
The prosecution will build its case on the basis of Kirk versus the computer. Now if your attorney tries to defend on that basis, you won't have a chance.
What other choice is there?
That's up to your attorney, and that's why he's got to be a good one.
You, perhaps?
No, I'm busy.
Well, a girl with your ability should be able to handle two cases at once.
Jim, be serious. You're not an ordinary human. You're a Starship Captain, and you've stepped into scandal. If there's any way they can do it, they'll slap you down hard and permanently for the good of the service.
You still haven't made any recommendation.
Samuel T. Cogley, attorney at law. If anyone can save you, he can. He'll be paying you a visit. Jim, I've got to go.
Areel, you still haven't told me how you know so much about what the prosecution's going to do.
Because, Jim Kirk, my dear old love, I am the prosecution, and I have to do my very best to have you slapped down hard. Broken out of the service, in disgrace.
You Kirk?
Yes. (Notices the piles of books everywhere) What is all this?
I figure we'll be spending some time together, so I moved in.
I hope I'm not crowding you.
What's the matter? Don't you like books?
Oh, I like them fine, but a computer takes less space.
A computer, huh? I got one of these in my office. Contains all the precedents. The synthesis of all the great legal decisions written throughout time. I never use it.
Why not? 
I've got my own system. Books, young man, books. Thousands of them. If time wasn't so important, I'd show you something. My library. Thousands of books.
And what would be the point?
This is where the law is. Not in that homogenised, pasteurised, synthesiser. Do you want to know the law, the ancient concepts in their own language, Learn the intent of the men who wrote them, from Moses to the tribunal of Alpha 3? Books.
You have to be either an obsessive crackpot who's escaped from his keeper or Samuel T. Cogley, attorney at law.
Right on both counts. Need a lawyer?
I'm afraid so.
This court is now in session. I have appointed as members of this court Space Command Representative Lindstrom, Starship Captains Krasnovsky and Chandra. Captain Kirk, I direct your attention to the fact that you have a right to ask for substitute officers if you feel that any of these named harbour any prejudiced attitudes to your case.
I have no objections, sir.
Do you consent to the service Lieutenant Shaw as prosecuting officer and to myself as president of the court?
I do, sir.
All right, clerk.
Charge, culpable negligence. Specification in that on Stardate 2945.7, by such negligence, Captain Kirk, James T., did cause loss of life, to wit, the life of Records Officer Lieutenant Commander Finney, Benjamin. To all recorded charges and specifications, what is the plea?
Not guilty.
Proceed, Lieutenant.
I call Mister Spock.
Spock, serial number S179-276SP. Service rank, Lieutenant Commander. Position, First officer, science officer. Current assignment, USS Enterprise. Commendations, Vulcanian Scientific Legion of Honour. Awards of valour. Twice decorated by Starfleet command.
Mister Spock, as a First officer, you know a great deal about computers, don't you?
I know all about them.
It is possible for a computer to malfunction, is it not?
Affirmative.
Do you know of any malfunction which has caused an inaccuracy in the Enterprise computer?
Negative.
That answer is based on your mechanical survey of the Enterprise computer ordered by the defendant prior to this trial, is it not?
Affirmative.
Now the stardate
But the computer is inaccurate, never the less.
Why do you say that?
It reports that the jettison button was pressed before the Red Alert.
In other words, it reports that Captain Kirk was reacting to an extreme emergency that did not then exist.
And that is impossible.
Is it? Were you watching him the exact moment he pressed the jettison button?
No, I was occupied. The ship was already on Yellow Alert.
Then how can you dispute the finding of the log?
I do not dispute it. I merely state that it is wrong.
Oh? On what do you base that statement?
I know the Captain. He is in
Please instruct the witness not to speculate.
Lieutenant, I am half Vulcanian. Vulcanians do not speculate. I speak from pure logic. If I let go of a hammer on a planet that has a positive gravity, I need not see it fall to know that it has in fact fallen.
I do not see what that has to
Gentlemen, human beings have characteristics just as inanimate objects do. It is impossible for Captain Kirk to act out of panic or malice. It is not his nature.
In your opinion.
Yes. In my opinion.
Thank you. Your witness, Mister Cogley.
No questions.
You may step down.
I now call the personnel officer for the Enterprise.
Service rank, Ensign. Position, personnel officer. Current assignment, USS Enterprise.
In the course of your duties as personnel officer of the Enterprise, you would be familiar with the service records of all aboard?
(A young Asian woman) Yes, ma'am.
With reference to Records Officer Finney, was there in his service record a reported disciplinary action for failure to close a circuit?
Yes, ma'am.
Was the charge in that instance based upon a log entry by the officer who relieved him?
Yes, ma'am.
And who was that officer?
Ensign James T. Kirk.
Louder, please, for the court.
Ensign James T. Kirk.
Now the Captain Kirk who sits in this courtroom?
Yes, ma'am.
Thank you. Do you wish to cross-examine, Mister Cogley?
No questions.
You may step down.
I now call Doctor McCoy to the stand.
Service rank, Lieutenant Commander. Position, Ship's Surgeon. Current assignment, USS Enterprise. Commendations, Legion of Honour. Awards of valour. Decorated by Starfleet surgeons.
Doctor, you are, on the record, an expert in psychology, especially space psychology. Patterns which develop in the close quarters of a ship during long voyages in deep space.
I know something about it.
You have just heard the testimony of your own personnel officer, that it was an action of the then Ensign Kirk, which placed an unerasable blot on the record of the then Lieutenant Finney. Psychologically, Doctor, is it possible that Lieutenant Finney blamed Kirk for the incident?
It's possible.
He could have hated Kirk down through the years, blamed him for being passed over for promotion, blamed him for never being given a command of his own, correct?
He could have.
Now, let us hypothesise, Doctor. Is it normal for a person to return affection for hatred?
No.
Do we not tend to at first resent and then actively dislike the person who hates us?
Wait a minute. I don't quite follow you.
Hypothetically. Would not Captain Smith begin to hate Lieutenant Commander Jones once he learned that Lieutenant Commander Jones hated and detested him?
Well, yes, I suppose it could happen.
Then I ask you, is it not possible that Captain Kirk became aware of Lieutenant Commander Finney's hatred toward him and perhaps, even involuntarily, began to reciprocate?
Not Captain Kirk.
Any normal human, Doctor. Is it possible?
But he's not that kind of a man.
Is it theoretically possible, Doctor?
Yes. It's possible.
Thank you. Your witness, Mister Cogley.
No questions.
You may step down. Mister Cogley. You've listened to testimony from three witnesses, and in neither instance have you availed yourself of your right to cross-examine. Have you abrogated that right?
Well, sir, the truth is, I've been holding back till we get this preliminary business out of the way. I'd like to call Captain Kirk to the stand.
James T. Kirk, serial number SC937-0176CEC. Service rank, Captain. Position, Starship command. Current assignment, USS Enterprise. Commendations, Palm Leaf Of Axanar Peace Mission, Grankite Order of Tactics, Class of Excellence, Prantares Ribbon of Commendation, Classes first and second
May it please the court.
Court recognises counsel for the prosecution.
The prosecution concedes the inestimable record of Captain Kirk.
Mister Cogley?
I wouldn't want to slow the wheels of progress. But then on the other hand, I wouldn't want those wheels to run over my client in their unbridled haste.
Continue.
Awards of valour, Medal of Honour, Silver Palm with Cluster, Starfleet citation for Conspicuous Gallantry, Karagite Order of Heroism
Stop. I think that's enough. I wouldn't want to slow things up too much.
Thank you.
Now, Captain, despite what these machines indicate, was there indeed a Red Alert before you jettisoned the pod?
Yes, sir, there was. 
Please tell us about it.
Firstly, I am at a loss to explain the errors in the extract from the computer log. We were in an ion storm. Everyone here in this court knows the dangers involved. I was in command. The decisions were mine, no one else's. Charges of malice have been raised. There was no malice. Lieutenant Commander Finney was a member of my crew, and that's exactly the way he was treated. It has been suggested that I panicked on the bridge and jettisoned the ion pod prematurely. That is not so. You've heard some of the details of my record. This was not my first crisis. It was one of many. During it, I did what my experience and training required me to do. I took the proper steps in the proper order. I did exactly what had to be done, exactly when it should have been done.
You did the right thing, but would you do it again?
Given the same circumstances I would do the same thing without hesitation, because the steps I took in the order I took them were absolutely necessary if I were to save my ship. And nothing is more important than my ship.
Your witness, Miss Shaw.
The prosecution does not wish to dishonour this man, but facts are facts. I must invite the attention of the court and Captain Kirk to this visual extract from the Enterprise computer log. Play back. What you are about to see is precisely what took place on the Enterprise bridge during the ion storm.
Meteorology reports ion storm upcoming, Captain.
We'll need somebody in the pod for readings.
Mister Finney is top of duty roster, Captain.
Post him.
Attention, Commander Finney, report to pod for reading on ion plates.
Message Received.
Officer posted, Captain.
Stand by on alert status, Mister Spock.
Acknowledged.
Approaching ion storm, sir.
Warp factor one, Mister Hanson.
Warp one, sir.
Reverse. Stop. Go forward with magnification on the panel. Freeze that. Captain Kirk is now signalling a Yellow Alert. Go forward, normal view.
Call from the pod, sir.
Tie in.
Finney here, Captain. Ion readings in progress.
Make it fast, Ben. I may have to go to Red Alert.
Affirmative.
Hold our course, Mister Hanson.
Aye, aye, sir. Natural vibrations, force two, Captain. Force three.
Engineering, then ion pod.
Aye, aye, sir.
Engineering.
One third more thrust.
Working.
Ion pod.
Stand by to get out of there, Ben.
Aye, aye, sir.
Force five, sir.
Steady as she goes, Mister Hanson.
Freeze that! If the court will notice, the log plainly shows the defendant's finger pressing the jettison button. The condition signal reads Yellow Alert. Not red alert, but simply Yellow Alert. When the pod containing Lieutenant Commander Finney was jettisoned, the emergency did not as yet exist.
But that's not the way it happened.
Computers don't lie.
Are you suggesting that I did?
I'm suggesting that maybe you did have a lapse. It was possible, you know, with the strain you were under. There's still time to change our plea. I could get you off.
Two days ago, I would've staked anything on my judgment.
You did. Your professional career.
I spent my whole life training for decisions just like that one. My whole life. Is it possible that when the moment came? No. I know what I did. You can pull out if you want to.
There's no place to go, except back to court and hear the verdict.
Kirk here.
Captain.
I've run a complete megalyte survey on the computer.
I'll tell you what you found. Nothing, right?
You sound bitter, Captain.
Not bitter enough to forget to thank you for your efforts.
Further instructions?
No. It's not all bad, Mister Spock. Who knows. You may be able to beat your next captain at chess. Kirk out.
Chess.
Jamie. This is Lieutenant Commander Finney's daughter.
Mister Cogley, we've got to stop this. Make him take a ground assignment. I realise it wasn't his fault. I won't make any trouble. Make him change his plea.
It's too late for that, Jamie, but I'm glad you don't blame me anymore for what happened.
I was just so upset that night. I'm sorry.
Don't say any more.
But I have to. I never realised how close you and Dad had been until I read through some papers he wrote, letters to Mother and me. I don't know how I ever could've thought that you. Mister Cogley, ruining Jim won't change what's happened.
That's very commendable, Miss Finney, but most unusual. After all, Captain Kirk is accused of causing your father's death, and the evidence would indicate his guilt.
I was just thinking of Jim.
I know, and I thank you. I have to go and change. You ready?
No, but I may be getting ready.
Bishop, half level right.
Well, I had to see it to believe it.
Explain.
They're about to lop off the captain's professional head, and you're sitting here playing chess with the computer.
That is true.
Mister Spock, you're the most cold-blooded man I've ever known.
Why, thank you, Doctor. I've just won my fourth game.
That's impossible.
Observe for yourself. Rook to king's pawn four.
Bishop, half level right.
Now, this is the computer's move. And now mine. (takes the bishop) Checkmate. Mechanically, the computer's flawless. Therefore, logically, its report of the captain's guilt is infallible. I could not accept that, however.
So you tested the programme bank.
Exactly. I programmed it myself for chess some months ago. The best I should have been able to attain was a draw.
Well, why are you just sitting there?
Transporter room, stand by. We're beaming down.
Court is now in session. The board will entertain motions before delivering its verdict. Counsel for the prosecution?
Sir, the prosecution rests.
Counsel for the defence?
Sir, the defence rests.
Mister Cogley. Mister Cogley!
Sir, some new evidence has just been brought to my attention. I'd like to ask the court to
Objection! Counsel for the defence has rested his case.
Of what nature is this evidence?
I can't tell you, I'll have to show you.
Mister Cogley is well-known for his theatrics.
Is saving an innocent man's career a theatric? i
Counsels will kindly direct their remarks to the bench.
I'd be delighted to, sir, now that I've got something human to talk about. Rights, sir, human rights. The Bible, the Code of Hammurabi and of Justinian, Magna Carta, the Constitution of the United States, Fundamental Declarations of the Martian colonies, the Statutes of Alpha Three. Gentlemen, these documents all speak of rights. Rights of the accused to a trial by his peers, to be represented by counsel, the rights of cross-examination, but most importantly, the right to be confronted by the witnesses against him, a right to which my client has been denied.
Your Honour, that is ridiculous. We produced the witnesses in court. My learned opponent had the opportunity to see them, cross-examine them.
All but one. The most devastating witness against my client is not a human being. It's a machine, an information system. The computer log of the Enterprise. Can ask this court adjourn and reconvene aboard that vessel.
I protest, Your Honour.
And I repeat, I speak of rights. A machine has none. A man must. My client has the right to face his accuser, and if you do not grant him that right, you have brought us down to the level of the machine. Indeed, you have elevated that machine above us. I ask that my motion be granted, and more than that, gentlemen. In the name of humanity, fading in the shadow of the machine, I demand it. I demand it!
How many games of chess did you win from the computer, Mister Spock?
Five in all.
May that be considered unusual?
Affirmative.
Why?
I personally programmed the computer for chess months ago. I gave the machine an understanding of the game equal to my own. The computer cannot make an error and assuming that I do not either, the best that could normally be hoped for would be stalemate after stalemate, and yet I beat the machine five times. Someone, either accidentally or deliberately, adjusted the programming and therefore the memory banks of that computer.
Could that have had an effect on the visual playback we saw?
Object! The witness would be making a conclusion.
Sustained.
Hypothetically, Mister Spock. Hypothetically, Miss Shaw. If what you suggest had been done, it would be beyond the capabilities of most men. Is that true?
Affirmative.
What man aboard ship would it not be beyond?
The Captain, myself, and the records officer.
And at the moment, you have no records officer.
Affirmative. Until he was lost, our records officer was Lieutenant Commander Finney.
Captain Kirk, will you tell the steps you took to find Mister Finney after the storm?
I instituted a phase one search.
Describe a phase one search.
It's a painstaking, thorough attempt in and around the ship to find a man who's presumably injured and unable to respond.
It presupposes, does it not, that a man wishes to be found?
I beg your pardon?
If you start a search for a man, you assume, don't you, that he wants to be found? He's not hiding?
Yes.
On a ship of this size, could a man evade such a search?
Possibly.
Gentlemen, I submit to you that Lieutenant Commander Ben Finney is not dead.
Mister Cogley, we are waiting for proof of the extraordinary statement you made in the briefing room.
You shall have it, but first I need the co-operation of this court in conducting an experiment. Captain Kirk.
Gentlemen, for the purposes of this experiment, it'll be necessary for all personnel, except for members of the court and the command crew, to leave the ship. I am ordering all others to report to the transporter room.
Including myself, sir.
This court is by no means adjourned, Mister Cogley.
I have an errand ashore of vital importance to the purpose of this court, and I will return.
Very well.
Thank you, sir.
Captain, are you maintaining an engine crew aboard?
Our impulse engines have been shut down. We'll maintain orbit by momentum.
We hope to be finished long before that.
Ready, Mister Spock?
Affirmative, Captain.
Gentlemen, this computer has an auditory sensor. It can, in effect, hear sounds. By installing a booster, we can increase that capability on the order of one to the fourth power. The computer should bring us every sound occurring on the ship.
All personnel have left the ship as ordered, sir.
Doctor McCoy? All right, Mister Spock.
Turn it down a little. Gentlemen, that sound is caused by the heartbeats of all the people on board the ship. Doctor McCoy will use this white sound device to mask out each person's heartbeat so that it will be eliminated from the sounds we are hearing.
First, the Captain. Mister Spock.
And lastly, myself.
That's all of us, except for crewman in the transporter room. Mister Spock, eliminate his heartbeat. That accounts for everyone.
Finney.
B deck, in or near Engineering.
Seal off B deck, sections 18Y through 23D.
Acknowledged. 
So Finney is alive.
It would seem so. Commodore, this is my problem. I'd appreciate it if no one left the bridge.
Sam Cogley had gone a shore to bring Jamie Finney on board. We felt Jamie's presence would make Finney easier to handle in the event Finney really were alive.
Ben.
Ben Finney.
Mister Spock, encountering variants.
Compensate.
What does that mean?
The orbit is beginning to decay.
Ben, where are you?
Hello, Captain!
Nothing to say
Captain?
I'm glad you're alive.
You mean you're relieved because you think your career is saved. Well, you're wrong.
Ben! Ben, it's not too late. We can help you.
Like you helped me all along? Kept me down
Robbed me of my own command?
I'm a good officer, as good as you. I've watched you for years. The great Captain Kirk.
They told you to do it to me. You all conspired against me. You ruined me, but you won't do it anymore.
Put the phaser down, Ben.
Oh, I wouldn't kill you, Captain. Your own death would mean too little to you, But your ship
What about my ship?
It's dead. I've killed it. I tapped out your primary energy circuits.
Mister Spock, what's our orbit status?
Decaying, Captain.
Variants at second level
Depreciating unusually fast.
You're out of power. I know the ship, too. The Enterprise should've been mine. You kept me from it.
Ben. Why kill innocent people?
Innocent? Officers and gentlemen, Captains all. Except for Finney and his one mistake. A long time ago, but they don't forget.
I logged the mistake, Ben. Blame me, not them.
But they are to blame. All of them.
I was a good officer. I really was. I loved the service more than any man ever dared.
Mister Spock, we're running out of time.
Gentlemen, if you'll please hurry to the transporter room
Mister Spock, the court has not yet reached a verdict. We will hear this witness out.
Very well, sir.
It's not too late. You can be helped. But if you kill those people
Why shouldn't I? They killed me, didn't they? It's a fair trade.
Is Jamie included in that deal?
What do you mean?
She's on board by now. Yes. She's on board.
What? Why did you do that? Why did you bring her here? I'll kill you!
Beaten and sobbing, Finney told me where he had sabotaged the prime energy circuits.
The damage he'd caused was considerable, but not irreparable. With luck, I would be able to effect repairs before our orbit decayed completely.
Power returning, Mister Spock. Up fourteen points and rising.
Activate port impulse engines. One third power.
One third power.
Variants fading.
Orbit stabilising.
All secure, sir.
Unless the prosecution has an objection, I rule this court to be dismissed.
Absolutely no objection, sir.
How long will it be this time before I see you again?
At the risk of sounding like a mystic, that depends on the stars.
Sam Cogley asked me to give you something special. It's not a first edition, just a book. Sam says that makes it special.
I didn't have much of a chance to thank him.
He's busy on a case. He's defending Ben Finney. He says he'll win.
I wouldn't be a bit surprised.
Do you think it would cause a complete breakdown of discipline if a lowly lieutenant kissed a Starship Captain on the bridge of his ship?
Let's try. (a gentle but lingering kiss) See? No change. Discipline goes on.
And so must the Enterprise. Goodbye, Jim.
Goodbye, Areel. Better luck next time.
I had pretty good luck this time. I lost, didn't l?
She's a very good lawyer.
Obviously.
Indeed she is.
The Return of The Archons
O'Neil, we've got to keep going. Come on, get up.
The Captain gave us an order. We've got to find some clue.
Scouting party to Enterprise.
Come in.
What is it, Mister Sulu?
Captain, beam us up quick. Emergency.
Transporter room, lock onto Sulu and O'Neil. Beam up immediately.
Mister O'Neil, stand tight. They'll beam us up any minute.
O'Neil!
Sulu, what is it? Where's Lieutenant O'Neil?
What? Who?
Lieutenant O'Neil. Where is he?
You. You're not of the Body.
Doctor McCoy.
Doctor McCoy, transporter room. Quickly.
You, you did it. They knew we were Archons. These are the clothes they wear, not these.
Sulu, take it easy.
Landru. Landru.
Sit down. (McCoy enters) What happened?
They're wonderful. They're the sweetest, friendliest people in the universe. It's paradise, my friend. Paradise.
Lieutenant O'Neil. Where is he?
Paradise. Paradise.
Materialisation completed. Kirk out.
Odd. The expression on that man's face. The mindlessness. Vacant contentment.
Like Sulu. If everybody on this planet is like him. Let's go.
Joy to you, friends.
Joy to you.
You be strangers. Come for the Festival, are ya?
Yes.
Got a place to sleep it off yet? Go round to Reger's house. He's got rooms. But you'll have to hurry. It's almost the Red Hour.
This Festival, it starts at six o'clock?
Tula, these folks come for the Festival. Your daddy can put them up, can't he?
We've just arrived.
Tula, come!
Let's get out of here.
Welcome? You are strangers?
Yes, that's right. We're from the valley.
You came for the Festival?
Yes.
Then how come you here?
Are you Reger?
Yes.
You have a daughter named Tula.
Yes.
Well, you'd better do something. She's outside.
I know. It's Festival. It's the will of Landru.
Reger, these are young men. They are not old enough to be excused.
They're visitors.
Well, have they no Lawgivers in the Valley? Why be they not at the Festival?
We heard that you might have rooms for us.
There. You see, Hacom? They've merely come looking for a place to rest afterwards.
The Red Hour has already struck.
Hacom, these be strangers. The Valley has different ways.
Do you say that Landru is not everywhere?
No, of course not. It's simply they may have different ways.
They've come looking for shelter. Can I turn them away? Come, please.
But the girl, out there.
She is in festival, as you should be.
Come, please. Hurry.
The Lawgivers should know.
Surely, Hacom, they already know. Are they not infallible?
You mock them! You mock the Lawgivers. And the strangers are not of the Body. You will see.
But, Hacom
You can return here at the close of the Festival. It's quiet. You'll have need of rest.
We have no plans to attend the Festival, sir.
The hour is struck. You can hear.
I'd like to hear more about this Festival, and Landru.
(alarmed) Landru? You ask? You're strange. You scorn Festival? Are you? Are you?
What about Landru?
Landru. My guess is we have until morning. Let's put the time to good use. Doctor, do atmospheric readings to determine whether there's anything in the air to account for all this. Mister Lindstrom, correlate all that you've seen with any other sociological parallels, if any.
Spock. Spock, Lindstrom. Doc.
No, no it's all over now. It's all over now, child. That's all right. Quiet.
Excuse me.
It's all right. It's all over.
He'll give her a shot. It'll calm her down. Trust us.
You didn't even try to bring her back. What kind of father are you?
It's Landru's will.
What about Landru? Who is he?
It is true then. You did not attend the Festival last night.
No.
Then you're not of the Body. You couldn't be.
She's asleep.
Are you, are you Archons?
What if we are?
It was said more would follow. If you are indeed
We must hide them. Quickly. The Lawgivers.
We can take care of ourselves.
Landru will know. He will come.
He is the one. He mocked the Lawgivers. I heard him.
No, Hacom. It was a jest.
The others, they were here, but they scorned the Festival. I saw it.
Tamar, stand clear.
I hear and obey the voice of Landru.
You attacked the Body. You have heard the Word and disobeyed. You will be absorbed.
What do you mean, absorbed?
There, you see? Not of the body.
You will be absorbed. The Good is all. Landru is gentle. You will come.
We're not going anywhere.
It is the law. You must come.
I said we're not going anywhere.
Evidently they're not prepared to deal with out right disobedience. How did you know?
Everything we've seen here so far seems to indicate some sort of compulsive involuntary stimulus to action.
Your analysis seems logical.
It is clear that you simply did not understand. I will re-phrase. You are ordered to accompany us to the absorption chambers.
Why did you kill that man?
Out of order. You will obey. It is the word of Landru.
You tell Landru that we'll come in our own time and that we'll speak to him.
You cannot. It is Landru.
Landru.
Fascinating. This is merely a hollow tube, Captain. No mechanism.
They're communing. We have time. Come with me.
Where to?
To a place I know. You'll be safe there, but we must hurry. Landru will come.
Quite a festival they had.
Peace.
What do you make of all this?
Totally illogical. Yesterday, without apparent cause or reason, they wrought total havoc. Yet today, now
Now they're back to normal.
Morning, friends.
Your daughter. That's the man.
No, it wasn't Bilar. It was Landru. Let's hurry, we haven't much time.
It's too late. Look.
What is it?
Landru. He's summoning the body.
Telepathy, Captain.
Phasers on stun. Which way, Reger?
Perhaps through there, but Landru
We'll handle Landru, Just get us out of this.
I don't want to hurt them. Warn them back.
They're in the Body. It's Landru.
Phasers on stun, wide field. Fire.
Fire.
Security.
Captain.
Lieutenant O'Neil. He's one of our men.
Not anymore. He's been absorbed.
Bring him along.
The Lieutenant is one of them. When he wakes, Landru will find us through him. Leave him there. He's our enemy. He's been absorbed.
Captain, now that we've got Lieutenant O'Neil, let's beam up out of here.
We still don't know what's happened to the Archons. Which way? Bring him along.
Put him over there.
A lighting panel.
Amazing in this culture.
Comes from a time before Landru.
Before Landru? How long ago was that?
Nobody knows positively. Some say as long ago as six thousand years.
It took a very advanced technology to construct a device like this. Inconsistent with this environment
But not inconsistent with what we've seen. Security.
Those staffs. Hollow tubes. Antennae for some sort of broadcast power. What is it, Mister Spock?
Strong power generations, Captain. Near here, but radiating in all directions.
He'll be coming around soon, Captain.
He must not. He's been absorbed.
Absorbed?
The Body absorbs its enemies. It only kills when it has to. When the first Archons came, they were free, out of control, opposing the will of Landru. Many were killed, many more were absorbed. When he regains consciousness, Landru will find us through him. And if the others come
What others?
Those like you and me, who resist Landru.
An underground? How are you organised?
In threes. Myself, Tamar, who's dead now, and one other.
Who?
I don't know. Tamar was my contact.
Give me a decision, Captain. He's coming out of it.
He must not regain consciousness. He'll destroy us all. He's of the Body.
Give him a shot. Keep him asleep. Reger, I want some answers. This underground. If Landru is so powerful, how do you survive?
I don't know, Captain. Some of us escape the directives. Not many, but a few. It was that way when the first Archons came.
The Archons. Tell me about them.
They had invaded the Body, but they resisted the will of Landru. You see, Landru had pulled them down from the skies.
Pulled them down from the skies? A starship? Mister Spock, those power readings you took, are they?
Powerful enough to destroy a starship? Affirmative.
Kirk to Enterprise, come in.
Captain, we're under attack. There are heat beams of some kind coming up from the planet surface.
Status report.
Our shields are holding, but they're taking all our power.
If we try to warp out or move on impulse, we'll lose our shields and burn up like a cinder.
Orbit condition.
Checking. We're going down, Captain. Unless we can get those beams off us so we can use our engines, we're due to hit atmosphere in less than twelve hours.
Keep your shield up. Do everything you can to maintain orbit. We'll try and locate the source of the beam and stop it here.
Impossible to break away. I've tried the emergency bypass circuits but they haven't been effective.
Captain.
What is it?
Sensor beams, very strong. We're being probed. In this direction.
Landru.
Block them out.
Too strong, Captain. Can't be blocked.
(adopting a prayerful posture) Oh.
I am Landru.
Projection, Captain. Unreal.
But beautiful, Mister Spock, with no apparatus at this end.
You have come as destroyers. You bring an infection.
You are holding my ship. I demand that you release it.
You have come to a world without hate, without fear, without conflict. No war, no disease, no crime. None of the ancient evils. Landru seeks tranquillity. Peace for all. The universal good.
We mean you no harm. Ours is a mission of peace and good will.
The good must transcend the evil. It shall be done. So it has been since the beginning.
He doesn't hear you, Captain.
(drawing his phaser) Maybe he'll hear this.
Put that away. Landru, listen to me.
You will be absorbed. Your individuality will merge into the unity of the good, and in your submergence into the common being of the Body, you will find contentment and fulfillment. You will experience the absolute good.
Oh.
Mister Spock. Wake up. Mister Lesley.
Where's Doctor McCoy?
He was gone when I woke up, along with the other guard and Mister O'Neil.
I should say they've been here and been removed.
Where is here?
Evidently a maximum security establishment. Are you armed?
No. All our phasers are gone. I checked. That's locked.
Oh, does my head ache.
The natural result of being subjected to a hypersonic.
Oh, is that what it was?
Sound waves. Stronger, they might have killed us. As it was, they merely rendered us unconscious.
Enough analysis. Let's think of a way to get out of here. What about the Lawgivers' inability to cope with the unexpected?
We shouldn't depend on that happening again, Captain. In a society as well organised as this one seems to be, I cannot conceive of such an oversight going uncorrected. Interesting, however. Their reaction to your defiance was remarkably similar to the reaction of a computer when fed insufficient or contradictory data.
Are you suggesting the Lawgivers are mere computers, that they aren't human?
Quite human, Captain. It's simply that all the facts are not yet in. There are gaps.
Doc. How?
Hello, friend. We were told to wait here.
Doc!
Can I help you, friend?
Don't you know me?
We all know one another and Landru.
Like Sulu.
Think, man. The Enterprise. The ship. Remember?
You speak very strangely, friend. Are you from away?
You do remember!
Ask Landru. He remembers. He knows and he watches. You are strange. Are you not of the Body?
Come.
No.
Then you will die.
You've been corrected, Captain. You'd better go.
All right. Work on Bones. See if you can't
Come.
Doctor McCoy, what will happen to him?
He goes to joy, peace, and tranquillity. He goes to meet Landru. Happiness is to all of us, blessed by Landru.
I am Marplon. It is your hour. Happy communing.
With thanks. Happy communing.
Well?
Impossible. He's under extremely powerful control.
Are we just going to stand here?
Little else we can do, unless you can think of a way to get through that door.
Well, this is simply ridiculous. A bunch of stone age characters running around in robes.
And apparently commanding powers far beyond our comprehension. Not simple, not ridiculous. Very, very dangerous.
You. Come.
Joy to you, friend. Peace and contentment will fill you. You will know the peace of Landru.
Have no fear, friend. The effect is harmless. My name is Marplon. I was too late to save your first two friends. They have been absorbed. Beware of them.
What about the Captain?
He is unharmed, unchanged. I am the third man in Reger's triad. We have been awaiting your return.
We are not Archons, Marplon.
Whatever you may call yourselves, you are in fulfillment of prophecy. We ask your help.
Where is Reger?
He will join us. He is immune to absorption. Hurry. We have not much time.
Who is Landru?
I cannot answer your questions now. Landru, he will hear. Here are your weapons. You may need them.
Behave as you saw your Captain behave. It is done.
Joy be with you. Peace and contentment.
Captain.
Peace and tranquillity to you. (in a whisper) Are you all right?
Quite all right. Be careful of Doctor McCoy.
I understand. Landru.
I am formulating a theory, Captain.
And?
Not here. The doctor.
You speak in strange whispers. This is not the way of Landru.
Joy be yours, and tranquillity, my friend.
And peace and harmony. Are you of the Body?
The Body is one.
Blessed be the Body, and health to all of its parts.
My friends. (guiding Red and Spock away to a quiet corner) What is your theory, Mister Spock?
This is a soulless society, Captain. It has no spirit, no spark. All is indeed peace and tranquillity. The peace of the factory, the tranquillity of the machine. All parts working in unison.
And when something unexplained happens, their routine is disrupted.
Until new orders are received. The question is, who gives those orders?
Landru.
There is no Landru, Captain, not in the human sense.
You're thinking the same thing I am. Mister Spock, the plug must be pulled.
Sir?
Landru must die.
Captain, our Prime Directive of non-interference.
That refers to a living, growing culture. Do you think this one is?
Joy to you all, friends.
It is the gift of Landru. (goes over to Kirk) I've brought your signalling devices. You may need them.
What we need is more information about Landru. (Reger shakes his head) You said you wanted us to help you.
The prophecy says
Never mind what the prophecy says. If you want to be liberated from Landru, we'll need your help.
Captain.
You're not of the Body!
Peace
You're not!
to you, friend. Joy and tranquillity.
Lawgivers!
Lawgivers! (trying to strangle Kirk) Traitor! Traitors! Traitors!
Doc, I don't want to hurt you.
Traitors!
Spock.
Isn't that somewhat old-fashioned? Robes.
Where is Landru?
No, no.
Where do we find him?
We do not see him. We hear him, in the Hall of Audiences.
In this building?
(reluctantly) Yes.
You're going to take us there. (the two men are terrified at the prospect) Spock, call the Enterprise.
No.
Snap out of it! Start acting like men.
Spock to Enterprise. status report.
Mister Spock, I've been trying to reach you.
Report, Scott.
The orbit's still decaying. I give it six hours, more or less.
Those heat beams are still on us. You've got to cut them off, Mister Spock, or we'll cook.
Scotty, stand by. We're doing the best we can. How's Mister Sulu?
He's peaceful enough, but he worries me.
Put a guard on him.
On Sulu?
That's an order. Watch him. Captain out.
Captain. (gives him a phaser)
There was war. Convulsions. The world was destroying itself. Landru was our leader. He saw the truth. He changed the world. He took us back, back to a simple time. A time of peace and tranquillity.
What happened to him?
He's still alive. He is here now. He sees. He hears. We have destroyed ourselves. Please, no more.
You said you wanted freedom. It's time you learned that freedom is never a gift. It has to be earned. Come on. We're going to find Landru.
No, no, I was wrong! I submit, I bear myself to the will of Landru!
It's too late for that.
No! Lawgivers! Help! Help me!
All right, it's up to you. Take us to Landru.
This is the Hall of Audiences.
Open it.
But this is Landru.
Open it.
Landru speaks here.
Landru! Landru. We are the Archons. We are the Archons. We've come to speak. We are the Archons. We want to talk to you.
Landru! He comes!
Despite my efforts to save you, you have invaded the Body and you are causing great harm.
We have no intention of causing harm.
Obliteration is necessary. The infection is strong. For the good of the Body, you must die. It is a great sorrow.
We do not intend to die.
All who saw you, all who know of your presence here must be excised. The memory of the Body will be cleansed.
Listen to me.
Useless, Captain. A projection.
Yes, Mister Spock. Let's have a look at the projector.
Of course. It had to be. Landru.
A machine. This whole society is a machine's concept of perfection. Peace, harmony.
But no soul.
I am Landru. You have intruded.
Pull out its plug, Mister Spock.
Your devices have been neutralised. So it shall be with you. I am Landru.
Landru died six thousand years ago.
I am Landru. I am he. All that he was, I am. His experience, his knowledge.
But not his wisdom. He may have programmed you, but he could not have given you a soul. You are a machine.
Your statement is irrelevant. You will be obliterated. The good of the Body is the Prime Directive.
The good of the Body, Captain. That's the key.
Yes. What is the good?
I am Landru.
Landru is dead. You are a machine. A question has been put to you. Answer it.
The good is the harmonious continuation of the Body. The good is peace, tranquillity. The good of the Body is the directive.
Then I put it to you that you have disobeyed the Prime Directive. You are harmful to the Body.
The body is. It exists. It is healthy.
The body is dying. You are destroying it.
Do you ask a question?
What have you done to do justice to the full potential of every individual of the Body?
Insufficient data.
Without freedom of choice, there is no creativity. Without creativity, there is no life. The body dies. The fault is yours.
Are you aiding the body, or are you destroying it?
(sounding very machine-like, Davros-like) I am not programmed to answer that question.
Landru! Guide us, Landru!
Not necessary, Captain. They have no guidance. Possibly for the first time in their lives.
Landru, answer the question.
Peace, order, and tranquillity are maintained. The body lives, but I reserve creativity to me.
Then the body dies. Creativity is necessary for the health of the Body.
This is impossible.
Is this truly Landru?
What's left of him, after he built and programmed this machine six thousand years ago.
You must create the good. That is the will of Landru, nothing else.
But there is evil.
Then the evil must be destroyed. That is the Prime Directive. And you are the evil.
I think. I live.
You are the evil. The evil must be destroyed. Fulfill the Prime Directive.
You
Landru, help me!
are the evil. Fulfill the Prime Directive.
Help me! Help me! Help me! Help me!
Well, Marplon, you're on your own now. I hope you're up to it. (to Lawgivers) And you can get rid of those robes. If I were you, I'd start look for another job. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Captain, are you all right?
What about the ship?
The heat rays are gone, Captain, and Mister Sulu's back to normal.
Relieving you.
Excellent, Scotty. Stand by to beam up landing party. Let's go and see how the others are doing. Marplon can finish up here.
Marvellous.
What?
The late Landru, Captain. A marvellous feat of engineering. A computer capable of directing the lives of millions of human beings.
But only a machine, Mister Spock. The original Landru programmed it with all his knowledge but he couldn't give it his wisdom, his compassion, his understanding, his soul, Mister Spock.
Predictably metaphysical. I prefer the concrete, the graspable, the provable.
You'd make a splendid computer, Mister Spock.
That is very kind of you, Captain.
Captain, Mister Lindstrom from the surface.
Yes, Lindstrom.
I just wanted to say goodbye, Captain.
How's it going?
Couldn't be better. Already this morning, we've had half a dozen domestic quarrels and two genuine knock-down drag-outs. It may not be paradise, but it's certainly human.
Sounds most promising. Good luck.
How often mankind has wished for a world as peaceful and secure as the one Landru provided.
Yes. And we never got it. Just lucky, I guess.
Space Seed
Coming up on it fast, sir.
Are you certain of your sensor readings?
Definitely a space vessel of some type.
Origin?
Unknown. It could hardly be an Earth ship. There have been no flights into this sector for years.
I'm picking up a signal, sir. (a series of beeps comes over the speakers) Captain, that's the old Morse code call signal.
Thank you.
CQ. CQ.
We're reading it, Lieutenant. I thought you said it couldn't possibly be an Earth vessel.
I fail to understand why it always gives you pleasure to see me proven wrong.
An emotional Earth weakness of mine. There it is.
An old Earth vessel, similar to the DY=500 class.
Much older. DY-100 class, to be exact. Captain, the last such vessel was built centuries ago, back in the 1990s.
Then it's a derelict, its signal left on automatic.
Or an old Earth ship being used by aliens.
Weapons status.
Bioscanners report.
Life science bioscanners are picking up heart beats from over there. Can't be human, though. They're too faint, and average only four beats per minute.
Sensor reading, Captain. Some sort of equipment functioning on that vessel.
All decks go to full alert.
Weapons department, maintain battle stations. All other decks standby alert.
All decks acknowledging, sir.
We're continuing to pick up some form of heart action over there. Very faint, very slow. Seems to be coming from about sixty or seventy bodies, as near as I can tell.
Alien bodies, Bones?
Could be. There's no sign of breathing or other form of respiration.
Hull surface is pitted with meteor scars. However, scanners make out a name. SS Botany Bay.
Then you can check the registry.
No such vessel listed. Records of that period are fragmentary, however. The mid=1990s was the era of your last so-called World War.
The Eugenics Wars.
Of course. Your attempt to improve the race through selective breeding.
Now, wait a minute. Not our attempt, Mister Spock. A group of ambitious scientists. I'm sure you know the type. Devoted to logic, completely unemotional
All right, all right, gentlemen. As you were. Rig for tractor beam, Helm. Lock onto that vessel.
Rigging for tractor beam, sir.
The Bridge is yours, Mister Spock. Care to join the landing party, Doctor?
Well, if you're actually giving me a choice
I'm not. Oh, I'll need somebody familiar with the late 20th-Century Earth. Here's a chance for that historian to do something for a change. What's her name? McIvers?
Lieutenant McGivers.
Attention. The following personnel report to transporter room. Engineering Officer Scott, Lieutenant McGivers. Acknowledge.
McGivers. On my way.
Well, it looks like that ship was expecting us. We read heat coming on, complete oxygen atmosphere.
Very interesting. You ready, Bones?
No. I signed aboard this ship to practice medicine, not to have my atoms scattered back and forth across space by this gadget.
You're an old-fashioned boy, McCoy. Where's that historian? (McGivers enters) Come on, Lieutenant
McGivers, sir.
Energise.
Definitely Earth-type mechanism, sir. Twentieth century vessel. Old type atomic power. Bulky, solid. I think they used to call them transistor units. I'd love to tear this baby apart.
Captain, it's a sleeper ship.
Suspended animation.
I've seen old photographs of this. Necessary because of the time involved in space travel until about the year 2018. It took years just to travel from one planet to another.
Is it possible they're still alive after centuries of travel?
It's theoretically possible. I've never heard of it being tested for this long a period.
What a handsome group of people.
Jim, I have a new reading. The lights must have triggered some mechanism.
Captain, look here.
Scotty?
Beats me what's happening.
We've triggered something, all right. His heart beat's increasing. Now passing eight beats per minute. There are some signs of respiration beginning.
This one was probably programmed to be triggered first.
Could he be the leader? The leader. Lieutenant?
(dragging herself back from just gazing at the man) Yes, sir. The leader was often set to revive first. This would allow him to decide whether the conditions warranted revival of the others.
Heart beat now approaching forty per minute. The respiration pattern is firming up.
From the northern India area, I'd guess. Probably a Sikh. They were the most fantastic warriors.
Heart beat now fifty two and increasing.
The others?
There's no change, and they're mixed types. Western, mid-European, Latin, Oriental.
A man from the twentieth century coming alive.
Maybe. Heart beat dropping.
Circuit shorting.
Probably some dust.
Heartbeat now thirty, dropping fast. It's a heart flutter. He's dying.
Do something, Captain.
Can we?
It'd take an hour to figure it out.
What happens if we get him out of there?
He'll die in seconds if we don't.
How long?
How long have you been sleeping? Two centuries we estimate. Landing party to Enterprise. Come in.
Go ahead, boarding party. We read you.
Lock in on McCoy's beam. He's transporting back with a casualty we discovered here.
Magnificent.
Kirk to boarding party.
Scott here.
Scotty, any records, log books of any kind?
Negative, Captain. It appears they were in suspended animation when the ship took off.
How many alive?
Twelve units have malfunctioned, leaving seventy two still operating. Thirty of those are women.
Kirk out. Seventy two alive. A group of people dating back to the 1990s. A discovery of some importance, Mister Spock. There are a great many unanswered questions about those years.
A strange, violent period in your history. I find no record what so ever of an SS Botany Bay. Captain, the DY-100 class vessel was designed for interplanetary travel only. With simple nuclear-powered engines, star travel was considered impractical at that time. It was ten thousand to one against their making it to another star system. And why no record of the trip?
Botany Bay. That was the name of a penal colony on shores of Australia, wasn't it? If they took that name for their vessel
If you're suggesting this was a penal deportation vessel, you've arrived at a totally illogical conclusion.
Oh?
Your Earth was on the verge of a dark ages. Whole populations were being bombed out of existence. A group of criminals could have been dealt with far more efficiently than wasting one of their most advanced spaceships.
Yes. So much for my theory. I'm still waiting to hear yours.
Even a theory requires some facts, Captain. So far I have none.
And that irritates you, Mister Spock.
Irritation?
Yeah.
I am not capable of that emotion.
My apologies, Mister Spock. You suspect some danger in them?
Insufficient facts always invites danger, Captain.
Well, we'd better get some facts. Rig for towing.
Aye, aye, sir.
Make course for Starbase Twelve.
Aye, sir.
(to nurse) That'll be all. (she leaves)
Bones?
He'll live.
My compliments.
No, I'm good, but not that good. There's something inside this man that refuses to accept death. Look at that. Even as he is now, his heart valve action has twice the power of yours and mine. Lung efficiency is fifty percent better.
An improved breed of human. That's what the Eugenics War was all about.
I'd estimate he could lift us both with one arm. It will be interesting to see if his brain matches his body.
Doctor, will he live?
It appears he will, Lieutenant. (leaves)
I'd like to talk to you.
If I were to rate your performance as a member of the landing party today I
I know, sir. I'm sorry.
Lieutenant, at any one time, the safety of this entire vessel might depend upon the performance of a single crewman, and the fact that you find a man strangely compelling to you personally
Not personally, Captain. Professionally. My profession is historian, and when I find a specimen from the past alive, I'm in the sheer delight of examining his mind.
And men were more adventuresome then. Bolder, more colourful.
Yes, sir, I think they were.
Good. If I can have honesty, it's easier to overlook mistakes. That's all.
Yes, sir.
A pity you wasted your life on command, Jim. You'd have made a fair psychologist.
Fair? (leaves)
Sickbay to lab. Anything new on those bios?
Good. McCoy out.
Well, either choke me or cut my throat. Make up your mind.
English. I thought I dreamed hearing it. Where am I?
You're in (a squeeze makes him lower his voice) You're in bed, holding a knife at your doctor's throat.
Answer my question.
It would be most effective if you would cut the carotid artery, just under the left ear.
I like a brave man.
I was simply trying to avoid an argument. (takes the scalpel) You're aboard the United Spaceship Enterprise. Your vessel is in tow.
I remember a voice. Did I hear it say I had been sleeping for two centuries?
That is correct.
Where is your Captain? I have many questions.
Bridge.
I have a patient here with many questions, Captain.
On my way.
James Kirk, commanding the starship Enterprise.
I see.
And your name?
I have a few questions first. What is your heading?
Our heading is Starbase Twelve, a planet in the Gamma 400 star system. Our command base in this sector. Is that of any use to you?
And my people?
Seventy two of your life-support canisters are still functioning.
You will revive them.
As soon as we reach Starbase Twelve.
I see.
And now
Khan is my name.
Khan. Nothing else?
Khan.
What was the exact date of your lift off? We know it was sometime in the early 1990s, but
I find myself growing fatigued, Doctor. May we continue this questioning at some other time?
The facts I need, Mister Khan, will take very little time. For example, the nature of your expedition.
Jim. A little later might be better.
Captain, I wonder if I could have something to read during my convalescence. I was once an engineer of sorts. I would be most interested in studying the technical manuals on your vessel.
Yes, I understand. You have two hundred years of catching up to do.
Precisely.
They're available to any patient on the viewing screen. Doctor McCoy will show you how to tie into the library tapes.
Thank you, Captain. You are very co-operative.
This Khan is not what I expected of a twentieth century man.
I note he's making considerable use of our technical library.
Common courtesy, Mister Spock. He'll spend the rest of his days in our time. It's only decent to help him catch up. Would you estimate him to be a product of selective breeding?
There is that possibility, Captain. His age would be correct. In 1993, a group of these young supermen did seize power simultaneously in over forty nations.
Well, they were hardly supermen. They were aggressive, arrogant. They began to battle among themselves.
Because the scientists overlooked one fact. Superior ability breeds superior ambition.
Interesting, if true. They created a group of Alexanders, Napoleons.
I have collected some names and made some counts. By my estimate, there were some eighty or ninety of these young supermen unaccounted for when they were finally defeated.
That fact isn't in the history texts.
Would you reveal to war-weary populations that some eighty Napoleons might still be alive?
Ship's historian, Lieutenant
Marla McGivers.
Yes.
I am told you participated in my rebirth.
In a small way.
I've been reading up on starships, but they have one luxury not mentioned in the manuals.
I don't understand.
A beautiful woman. My name is Khan. Please sit and entertain me.
I'd like some historical information about your ship, its purpose and
And why do you wear your hair in such an uncomplimentary fashion?
It's comfortable.
But it's not attractive. (He takes her to a mirror and loosens a couple of strands at the back.) There. Soft. Natural. Simple.
Mister Khan, I'm here on business.
You find no pleasure here?
My interest is scientific. Men of. That is, the world of the past. I'm sure you understand to actually talk to a man of your century
There. Simple, soft. Please remember.
Perhaps some other time, when you feel more like talking about the past.
I'm glad you came. Please do it again.
Very impressive. Are we expecting a fleet admiral for dinner?
Lieutenant McGivers' idea to welcome Khan to our century. Just how strongly is she attracted to him?
Well, there aren't any regulations against romance, Jim.
My curiosity's official, not personal, Bones.
Well, he has a magnetism. Almost electric. You felt it. And it could over power McGivers with her preoccupation with the past.
Thank you. I hoped you might guide me to our dinner engagement. (sees a picture on the wall) Very good. Fine technique.
It's a gladiator named Flavius. He once
And you've rearranged your hair for me. Excellent.
All bold men from the past. Richard, Leif Ericson, Napoleon. A hobby of yours, such men?
I am honoured. Thank you. But I caution you. Such men dare take what they want.
Forgive my curiosity, Mister Khan, but my officers are anxious to know more about your extraordinary journey.
And how you managed to keep it out of the history books.
Adventure, Captain. Adventure. There was little else left on Earth.
There was the war to end tyranny. Many considered that a noble effort.
Tyranny, sir? Or an attempt to unify humanity?
Unify, sir? Like a team of animals under one whip?
I know something of those years. Remember, it was a time of great dreams, of great aspiration.
Under dozens of petty dictatorships.
One man would have ruled eventually. As Rome under Caesar. Think of its accomplishments.
Then your sympathies were with
You are an excellent tactician, Captain. You let your second in command attack while you sit and watch for weakness.
You have a tendency to express ideas in military terms, Mister Khan. This is a social occasion.
It has been said that social occasions are only warfare concealed. Many prefer it more honest, more open.
You fled. Why? Were you afraid?
I've never been afraid.
But you left at the very time mankind needed courage.
We offered the world order!
We?
Excellent. Excellent. But if you will excuse me, gentlemen and ladies, I grow fatigued again. With your permission, Captain, I will return to my quarters.
I wanted to apologise. They had no right to treat you that way.
Quite understandable, since I'm something of a mystery to them.
You're no mystery to me. I know exactly who you are.
Do you?
Leif Ericson, Richard the Lion Heart, Napoleon. I don't know if you're going to like living in our time.
Then I'll have to remold it to my liking.
Please don't.
Go. Or stay. But do it because it is what you wish to do. Well?
I'll stay a little longer.
How many minutes do you graciously offer?
I only meant
This grows tiresome. You must now ask to stay.
I'd like to stay. Please.
Open your heart. Will you open your heart?
Yes.
I intend to take this ship. Do you agree?
Oh, please don't ask me
I need your help.
You won't harm anyone?
Now you question me?
No.
Will you assist me?
Oh, please, Khan, don't ask me
Leave me then. Go, I say.
No. I promise. I'll do anything you ask.
Name, Khan, as we know him today. (Spock changes the picture) Name, Khan Noonien Singh.
From 1992 through 1996, absolute ruler of more than a quarter of your world. From Asia through the Middle East.
The last of the tyrants to be overthrown.
I must confess, gentlemen. I've always held a sneaking admiration for this one.
He was the best of the tyrants and the most dangerous. They were supermen, in a sense. Stronger, braver, certainly more ambitious, more daring.
Gentlemen, this romanticism about a ruthless dictator is
Mister Spock, we humans have a streak of barbarism in us. Appalling, but there, nevertheless.
There were no massacres under his rule.
And as little freedom.
No wars until he was attacked.
Gentlemen.
Mister Spock, you misunderstand us. We can be against him and admire him all at the same time.
Illogical.
Totally. This is the Captain. Put a twenty four hour security on Mister Khan's quarters, effective immediately.
I'm sorry, Captain. I was lost in thought. My door. Locked from outside, a guard posted.
Unusual treatment for Khan Noonien Singh.
Excellent. You identified me with your computer system, I imagine.
I'd like those answers now. First, the purpose of your star flight.
A new life, a chance to build a world. Other things I doubt you would understand.
Why? Because I'm not a product of controlled genetics?
Captain, although your abilities intrigue me, you are quite honestly inferior. Mentally, physically. In fact, I am surprised how little improvement there has been in human evolution. Oh, there has been technical advancement, but, how little man himself has changed. Yes, it appears we will do well in your century, Captain. Do you have any other questions?
Thank you. They've all been answered.
Move away.
Otto. Joaquin. The trip is over. The battle begins again. Only this time it's not a world we win. It's a universe. Kati.
On course, sir. Warp factor two.
Maintain. (he answers the intercom) Bridge.
Captain, Security here. Khan's escaped.
Sound security alert.
Security alert, Captain. Communication channels are down, Captain.
Turbo elevators inoperative. Jammed, Captain.
Atmospheric controls cut off.
Useless. They're on override in Engineering.
Engineering. Scotty. This is the Bridge.
Captain!
What's going on down there?
He's not able to answer you at the moment, Captain.
Your ship is mine. I have shut off the life-support system to your Bridge, and jammed up your exit routes. I am willing to negotiate.
Flood all decks with neural gas.
Impossible. Intruder control systems inoperative. Mister Khan was very thorough in his study of our tech manuals.
Contact Starbase Twelve.
All channels are totally jammed, Captain.
Brilliant. Every contingency anticipated.
Your air should be getting quite thin by now.
Do you surrender the Bridge?
Negative.
Academic, Captain. Refuse,
And every person on the Bridge will suffocate.
Nothing ever changes, except man. Your technical accomplishments? Improve a mechanical device and you may double productivity. But improve man and you gain a thousand fold. I am such a man. Join me. I'll treat you well. I need your training to operate a vessel this complex.
Where is Captain Kirk?
I see now I made one serious error. You are the Communications Officer? Engage the viewing screen, please.
No!
I should have realised that suffocating together on the Bridge would create heroic camaraderie among you. But it is quite a different thing to watch it happening to someone else. Engage the viewing screen. I'm sure you recognise your medical decompression chamber here, Doctor. And the meaning of that indicator. (It is dropping to 10Hg) Your Captain will die. If you join me, Mister Spock, I will save his life. My vessel was useless. I need you and yours to select a colony planet. One with a population willing to be led by us.
To be conquered by you. A starship would make that most simple, wouldn't it?
Each of you in turn will go in there. Die while the others watch.
Khan. There's no reason I must watch this, is there?
(Shakes his head) But I hoped you would be stronger. (She leaves) If any one of you joins me, anyone! I'll let him live. It's so useless!
It does not matter. The Captain is dead. Take Mister Spock next.
Khan said to watch him very closely. He may decide to co-operate.
Captain, I saved your life. Now please don't kill him.
Surprised to see you, Captain, though pleased.
I'm a little pleased myself. Situation?
Khan is holding our staff in the briefing room. His men have control of the ship.
Our only chance is the intruder control circuit. Although he's cut it off at the Bridge.
There's a relay junction down the corridor.
Gas all decks but this one.
Armoury, this is Khan. Report. Rodriguez. Ling. McPherson. Anyone. Report status.
Where's Khan?
I don't know. He got out just as the gas
Kirk here.
Anesthesia gas in all sections except Engineering. Someone just closed that line.
Captain, acknowledge. Unable to flood Engineering section. I suspect
This is Scott. Captain's headed for the Engineering section. I'll follow in case
Negative. We must retake the vessel while the anesthesia lasts. Meet me in the Armoury. I'm blowing it clear first. Spock out.
If I understood your manuals, that's an overload in progress. Your ship flares up like an exploding sun within minutes.
I have five times your strength. You're no match for me.
Record tapes engaged and ready, Captain.
This hearing is now in session. Under the authority vested in me by Starfleet Command, I declare all charges and specifications in this matter have been dropped.
Jim. Agreed you have the authority
Mister Spock, our heading takes us near the Ceti Alpha star system.
Quite correct, Captain. Planet number five there is habitable, although a bit savage, somewhat inhospitable.
But no more than Australia's Botany Bay colony was at the beginning. Those men went on to tame a continent, Mister Khan. Can you tame a world?
Have you ever read Milton, Captain?
Yes. I understand. Lieutenant Marla McGivers. Given a choice of court martial or accompanying them there.
(gazing into her eyes) It will be difficult. A struggle at first even to stay alive, to find food.
I'll go with him, sir.
A superior woman. I will take her. And I've gotten something else I wanted. A world to win, an empire to build.
This hearing is closed.
It's a shame for a good Scotsman to admit it, but I'm not up on Milton.
The statement Lucifer made when he fell into the pit. 'It is better to rule in hell than serve in heaven.'
It would be interesting, Captain, to return to that world in a hundred years and to learn what crop has sprung from the seed you planted today.
Yes, Mister Spock, it would indeed.
A Taste of Armageddon
Nothing yet, Lieutenant?
Nothing, Captain. Hailing frequencies are open.
Have you received an answer to your message yet, Captain?
Nothing yet, Ambassador. We're awaiting a reply. Today's the first time we've had any evidence they've picked up our signal.
Captain, message coming in from Eminiar Seven. Sir, it's code seven-ten.
Are you sure?
Positive. It repeats over and over.
Is that supposed to mean something?
Code seven-ten means under no circumstances are we to approach that planet. No circumstances what so ever.
You will disregard that signal, Captain.
Mister Fox, it is their planet.
Captain, in the past twenty years, thousands of lives have been lost in this quadrant. Lives that could have been saved if the Federation had a treaty port here. We mean to have that port and I'm here to get it.
By disregarding code seven-ten, you might well involve us in an interplanetary war.
I'm quite prepared to take that risk.
You are. I'm thinking about this ship, my crew.
I have my orders, Captain, and now you have yours. You will proceed on course. Achieve orbit status and just leave the rest to me. You're well aware that my mission gives me the power of command. I now exercise it. You will proceed on course. That's a direct order.
In view of code seven-ten, Captain, may I suggest
Yes, Mister Spock. This is the Captain. Condition Yellow Alert. Phaser crews stand by. Deflector shields up. We're going in. Peacefully, I hope. But peacefully or not, we're going in.
We know very little about them. Their civilisation is advanced. They've had space flight for several centuries, but they've never ventured beyond their own solar system. When first contacted more than fifty years ago, Eminiar Seven was at war with its nearest neighbour.
Anything else?
The Earth expedition making the report failed to return from its mission. The USS Valiant. Listed as missing in space.
Kirk, what's this about you going down alone?
Not alone. I'm taking some security people with me.
It is my prerogative.
I can't risk beaming you down there until I know what kind of reception you're going to receive. Your safety is my responsibility. Those are my orders, sir. Mister Spock.
Transporter room standing by, Captain.
What co-ordinates?
We've selected a site which from the traffic seems to be near an official establishment.
Final sensor readings?
No hostility directed toward us. No apparent notice taken of us at all, which seems strange. They did scan us when we assumed orbit. Obviously, they know we're here.
Ship's defences?
Screens down, but all defensive details on general alert status, Captain.
Good. Landing party will pick up phaser number one's from the arsenal. Keep them inconspicuous. Mister Scott.
Yes, sir.
The ship is yours. Take care of her until I come back.
Aye, aye, sir. And have a bonny trip.
We'll do our best. Let's go.
They will materialise there. Remember your instructions; They are to be treated correctly, nothing more.
I'm Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the United Federation of Planets.
I know. I'm Mea 3. I congratulate you on your instrumentation. You've come directly to the Division of Control. If you'll follow me, please.
Captain, I wish
Yes?
You were warned not to come here.
I had orders to come here. Why did your people tell us to stay away?
It was for your own safety, Captain.
I see no danger here.
The danger exists. Nevertheless, you are here. It would be morally incorrect to do less than extend our hospitality. Anan 7 and members of the High Council await you. If you will come this way, please.
I'm Captain Kirk. This is my first officer, Mister Spock, Lieutenants Galloway, Osborne, Yeoman Tamula.
Welcome to Eminiar Seven. Well, Captain, what can we do for you?
My mission is to establish diplomatic relations between your people and mine.
That is impossible.
Would you mind telling me why?
Because of the war.
You're still at war?
We have been at war for five hundred years.
You conceal it very well. Mister Spock?
Sir, we have completely scanned your planet. We find it highly advanced, prosperous in a material sense, comfortable for your people, and peaceful in the extreme. Yet you say you are at war. There is no evidence of this.
Casualties among our civilian population total from one to three million dead each year from direct enemy attack. That is one reason, Captain, why we told you to stay away. As long as your ship is orbiting our planet, it is in severe danger.
With whom are you at war?
The third planet in our system, called Vendikar. Originally settled by our people and now a ruthless enemy. Highly advanced technologically.
Please excuse me. Vendikar is attacking. Mea, care for our guests.
Strange.
To say the least.
It will not last long.
Don't you take shelter?
There is no shelter, Captain.
Are these attacks frequent?
Oh yes, and we will retaliate immediately.
Oh!
What is it?
A hit right here in the city.
Do you hear any explosions, Mister Spock?
None, Captain. Yeoman Tamula.
Sir?
Tricorder readings. Radiation. Disturbances of any kind.
Working, sir. No evidence.
Mea, if this is an attack, may I ask what weapons the enemy is using?
Fusion bombs, materialised by the enemy over their targets.
Kirk to Bridge. Scotty?
Scott here, Captain.
Scanners operative on the planet's surface?
Of course, sir. As per orders.
Anything unusual?
Nothing, sir. All quiet.
Thank you. Kirk out.
Look, Anan. (another flare on another screen)
Yes, I see it. They were warned.
Just as it happened fifty years ago.
Alert a security detachment. They may be needed.
It's a vicious attack, extremely destructive. Fortunately, our defences are firming, but our casualties are high. Very high.
Sir, I have been in contact with my ship, which has had this entire planet under surveillance. All during this so-called attack of yours, we have been monitoring you. There's been no attack, no explosions, no radiations, no disturbances whatsoever. If this is some sort of game you're playing
This is no game, Captain. Half a million people have just been killed. Activate the attack units, Sar.
Yes, Councilman.
Launch immediate counter attack.
Computers, Captain. They fight their war with computers. Totally.
Yes, of course.
Computer don't kill a half million people.
Deaths have been registered. Of course they have twenty four hours to report.
To report?
To our disintegration machines. You must understand, Captain, we have been at war for five hundred years. Under ordinary conditions, no civilisation could withstand that. But we have reached a solution.
Then the attack by Vendikar was theoretical.
Oh, no, quite real. An attack is mathematically launched. I lost my wife in the last attack. Our civilisation lives. The people die, but our culture goes on.
You mean to tell me your people just walk into a disintegration machine when they're told to?
We have a high consciousness of duty, Captain.
There is a certain scientific logic about it.
I'm glad you approve.
I do not approve. I understand.
Good. Then you will recall I warned you not to come here. You chose to ignore my warning. I'm sorry, but it's happened.
What has happened?
Once your ship was in orbit about our planet, it became a legitimate target. It has been classified destroyed by a tricobalt satellite explosion. All persons aboard your ship have twenty four hours to report to our disintegration machines. In order to ensure their co-operation, I have ordered you, Captain, and your party held in custody until they surrender. If possible, we shall spare your ship, Captain, but its passengers and crew are already dead.
I have been sent to ask if you require anything.
We require a great deal. I wish to speak to Anan Seven.
He's busy co-ordinating casualty lists.
He'll have more casualty lists than he knows what to do with if he doesn't get in here and talk to me.
Don't you understand? Our duty
Your duty doesn't include stepping into a disintegrator and disappearing.
I'm afraid mine does, Captain. I too have been declared a casualty. I must report to a disintegrator by noon tomorrow.
Is that all it means to you? To report and die?
My life is as dear to me as yours is to you, Captain.
Then how can you stand
Don't you see? If I refuse to report, and others refuse, then Vendikar would have no choice but to launch real weapons. We would have to do the same to defend ourselves. More than people would die then. A whole civilisation would be destroyed. Surely you can see that ours is a better way.
No, I don't see that at all.
It's been our way for almost five hundred years. Is there anything I can bring you?
Yes. Anan Seven.
I tell you, we should have heard something by now.
Aye, Doctor, that we should, but we haven't, and we cannot raise them. You know, if there'd been trouble, they should have at least managed to get word back to us.
We can't just sit here.
What would you suggest?
Me? I'm a doctor. If I were an officer of the line, I'd
Would you have me open fire?
Of course not.
Mister Scott, message coming in from the Captain.
Scott here, Captain.
Good news, Mister Scott. The Eminians have agreed to the establishment of full normal diplomatic relations.
Mister Fox'll be glad to hear about that.
They've also extended an invitation to all personnel to come ashore, for shore leave. They've assured me that our people will have a wonderful time.
Er, Captain?
All personnel?
All personnel. We'll transport up trained Eminians to assume support positions. Those are my orders, Mister Scott.
Aye, aye, Captain. We'll start forming shore parties immediately. Scott out. Well now, what do you think of that?
I don't know.
Well, I do. Computer, last message received and recorded from Captain Kirk.
In place.
Run it through analyser. Question. Is it or is it not the Captain's voice?
Negative. A close copy.
A voice duplicator?
Ninety eight percent probability.
Well, they've got them, Doctor, and now they're trying to get us.
Are you sure you can do it, Mister Spock?
Limited telepathic abilities are inherent in Vulcanians, Captain. It may work. It may not.
Do your best.
Thank you, Mister Spock.
My pleasure, Captain.
What do we do now, Captain?
We get our communicators back and try and contact the ship. Mister Spock, we'll need more weapons.
I understand.
We'll try to take it easy, but if we're forced to kill
An entrance, Captain, but no exit. They go in, but they do not come out.
A disintegration machine.
So I would assume.
Mea. What do you think you're doing?
I'm going
You're not going in there.
But I must.
No you're not.
Please. All right, don't worry about me.
Mister Spock, that guard. I'll cover you.
Sir, there's a multi-legged creature crawling on your shoulder.
All right, you people, clear out of the way.
What are you doing?
Throwing a monkey wrench into the machinery.
You can't do this.
I've done it. (The booth finally blows up.) Come on, let's get out of here.
The Federation prisoners have attacked their guard and escaped. They are armed. Disintegration station number twelve destroyed, Councilman, apparently by disruptor fire.
All security personnel, Federation prisoners have escaped. They are to be found. They are armed. If they resist, do what is necessary. Planetary disruptor banks, calculate orbit of star cruiser now circling. Stand by to fire. Full power.
Councilman, planetary disruptor banks locked onto target. Standing by.
In ten seconds, open fire. Destroy the star cruiser. Those are the orders of the Council.
All stations reporting. Deflector screens rigged at full power. Phaser crews ready. Sensors reading zero. Correction. Mister Scott.
Yes, Mister DePaul?
Sensor readings just shot off the scale.
Well, now. They're taking pot shots at us. Holding, Mister DePaul?
Screens firm, sir. Extremely powerful sonic vibrations. Decibels eighteen to the twelfth power. If those screens weren't up, we'd be totally disrupted by now.
Well, I guess that answers our questions, Mister Scott. They're not very friendly, are they?
Aye, but what about our Captain and the landing party down there somewhere?
We get them out.
If they're alive, and if we can find them. That's a big planet.
Not too big for the Enterprise to handle if it has to.
We can't fire full phasers with our screens up, and We can't lower our screens with their disruptors on us. Of course I could treat them to a few dozen photon torpedoes.
(entering the Bridge) You'll do no such thing, Mister Scott.
Mister Fox, we're under attack. They're trying to knock us down.
You have taken defensive measures.
Of course, but
There are no buts. Obviously it's a misunderstanding, and one of my jobs is to clear up misunderstandings.
They're holding our Captain.
We have no proof of that.
I'm responsible for the safety of this ship.
And I'm responsible for the success of this mission, and that's more important than this ship. Is that clear? We came here to establish diplomatic relations with these people.
But they're the ones who're looking for a fight, Mister Fox.
This is a diplomatic matter. If you check your regulations, you'll find that my orders get priority. I'll try to make contact with the planetary officials. Lieutenant, open up a channel and keep it open. Tell them to expect a priority one message from me. There will be no punitive measures, gentlemen. Those are my orders.
Diplomats. The best diplomat I know is a fully activated phaser bank.
Why did we come back here, Captain?
The last place they'll look for us is the place we escaped from. (gives her a gun) Cover the door.
Captain, you've got to let me go. My time is almost up.
Are you that anxious to die?
You don't understand.
Mister Spock, how did that little raid work out?
We captured four of their disrupter-type weapons, two complete outfits of male clothing, and perhaps most important of all, one of their communication devices.
Will it reach the ship?
Not at this time. Its range is restricted in comparison with ours. I may be able to alter its components, but it will take time.
Work on it. We've got to contact the ship. Mea, I want you to give me a complete layout of this building complex. How do I get to the War Room?
No!
Now listen to me. I'm trying to help you. To save your life and the lives of millions like you. If you help me, maybe I can do it. If you don't, you'll die, we'll die, and the killing will go on. Or are you that fond of the war?
What are you going to do?
We're going to try and stop the killing. We're trying to help. Believe me.
I believe you, but
Tell me what I want to know. Please.
Time is running out. We have been unable to destroy the Earth ship. One of our disintegration chambers has been eliminated and we have already fallen far behind in our quota. This is a grave crisis and I am at a loss to know how to proceed.
The central channel, Anan. The Earth ambassador's calling with an urgent message.
What is the great immorality, open honesty or a deception which may save our lives? Put me through to the Earth Ambassador.
A channel is open, Mister Ambassador. You will be speaking to Anan Seven, head of the High Council of the Eminian Union.
Mister Anan, this is Robert Fox
Special Ambassador for the United Federation of Planets.
A great honour, Mister Ambassador.
We have approached you openly
With the intent of establishing formal and friendly relations between our peoples, but now,
For some reason, you have attacked us, and apparently you're holding several special representatives of our Federation.
A mistake, Mister Ambassador. We are at war.
An error in our sensors indicated that your ship was about to attack us.
I'm giving orders that our attack be stopped.
Now, as to your representatives, you have my sacred word as an Eminian that they are alive and well.
Thank you. I thought perhaps it was all a mistake.
Mister Scott, disruptor beams are no longer hitting us.
Maintain status, Mister DePaul.
We are most anxious to establish relations with you, Mister Fox.
We will make arrangements to receive you. (to Sar, closing the channel) The minute their screens are down, open fire.
Yes, Councilman.
(reopening the channel) I apologise deeply for the misunderstanding. These are trying times for us, you understand.
I understand. Mister Anan, I presume that you have our ship's Captain on hand when I beam down.
He will be there, sir.
I give you my word.
I'm sure that from this day forward, your planet and our Federation will attain the deepest friendship. I look forward to seeing you.
Diplomacy, gentlemen, should be a job left to diplomats. You will, of course, immediately resume a peaceful status.
No, sir, I will not.
What did you say?
I'll not lower the screens, not until the Captain tells me to.
You are taking orders from me. You will lower the screens as a sign of good faith. My authority.
I know about your authority, but the screens stay up.
Mister Fox, they faked a message from the Captain, they've launched an attack against our ship. Now you want us to trust them openly?
I want you and expect you to obey my lawful orders.
No, sir. I won't lower the screens.
Your refusal to comply with my orders has endangered the entire success of this mission. I can have you sent to a penal colony for this.
That you can, sir, but I won't lower the screens.
Your name will figure prominently in my report to the Federation Central.
Well, Scotty, now you've done it.
Aye. The haggis is in the fire for sure, but I'll not lower my defences on the word of that mealy-mouthed gentleman down below. Not until I know what happened to the Captain.
Won't you join me in a drink, Captain? You'll find our trova most interesting.
I didn't come to drink.
I assume that is what you used to destroy disintegration chamber number twelve.
A very efficient weapon. I'm not afraid of using it.
My first impression was correct. You are a barbarian.
I am?
Don't sound so incredulous, Captain. Of course you are. We all are. A killer first, a builder second. A hunter, a warrior, and let's be honest, a murderer. That is our joint heritage, is it not?
We're less cold-blooded about it than you are.
What do you want, Captain?
I want to contact my ship. Where are my communicators?
In a safe place.
You take a lot of chances, Councilman.
You're worried about your ship, Captain. I'm trying to save a world.
If I were you, I'd think about saving my life.
Won't you have a drink, Captain?
And then we can discuss our differences.
I'm not interested in discussing our differences. You don't seem to realise the risk you're taking. We don't make war with computers and herd the casualties into suicide stations. We make the real thing, Councilman. I could destroy this planet.
Why do you think I don't let you talk to your ship ?
I don't need the ship for that.
You mean, all by yourself with a disruptor, you can destroy this planet?
That's exactly what I mean.
I had no idea you were so formidable.
You seem to think I'm joking. Where are the communicators?
If I told you, Captain, would you walk right out and get them?
Something like that.
Very well, Captain. They're in the War Room. Go left down the corridor, left again. They are unguarded.
Is he alive? Pity. Man like that would have preferred to die fighting. Take him to the Council Room.
Ambassador Fox?
I am Robert Fox. Have I the honour of addressing Anan Seven?
Welcome to Eminiar, Mister Ambassador.
Mister Ambassador, I am truly sorry for what must happen.
I beg your pardon?
You and your party have been declared war casualties. You will be taken immediately to one of our casualty stations so that your deaths may be recorded.
You mean we are to be killed?
That is correct, Mister Ambassador. I regret it very much, but there is nothing I can do about it.
Spock to Enterprise, come in.
Mister Scott, it's Mister Spock.
Scotty here, Mister Spock. Go ahead.
Is the ship all right?
We've been through a bit, but we're all right now. How about the Captain and you?
The Captain is overdue. We've suffered no casualties among us. This is important. Under no circumstances shall any one beam down from the Enterprise. They'd be killed the moment they arrived.
That ties it. That popinjay Fox went down a couple minutes ago.
The Ambassador?
I knew it had a rotten ring to it.
Orbit out to maximum phaser range and stand by for further orders. Spock out.
What are you going to do, Mister Spock?
Find the Ambassador and the Captain. Yeoman Tamula, you stay here and prevent this young lady from immolating herself. Knock her down if necessary. This is a killing situation. Do what you must to protect yourself. Clear?
Yes, sir.
What are you doing? I'm a representative of the United Federation of Planets! A special representative!
Spock!
Please, Mister Fox. Ladies and gentlemen, please move quickly away from the chamber or you may be injured.
What are you doing, Mister Spock?
Practicing a peculiar variety of diplomacy, sir.
I'll take you to a place of comparative safety, then I must find the Captain.
They have him. The guards told us. They took him to the Council Room under heavy guard.
By now, Mister Ambassador, I'm sure you realise that normal diplomatic procedures are ineffective here.
I've never been a soldier, Mister Spock, but I learn very quickly.
Very well, sir. We need all the help we can get.
Captain, surely you can see the position we are in. If your people do not report to our disintegration chambers, it is a violation of an agreement that dates back five hundred years.
My people are not responsible for your agreements.
You will be responsible for an escalation that will destroy everything. Millions of people horribly killed. Complete destruction of our culture here and yes, the culture on Vendikar. Disaster, disease, starvation, horrible, lingering death, pain and anguish!
That seems to frighten you.
It would frighten any sane man.
Yes. You're quite right.
Don't you understand, Captain? We have done away with all that. Now you are threatening to bring it down on us again. Are those five hundred people of yours more important than the hundreds of millions of innocent people on Eminiar and Vendikar? What kind of monster are you?
I'm a barbarian. You said it yourself.
I had hoped I'd spoken only figuratively.
Oh, no. You were quite accurate. I plan to prove it to you.
Open a channel to the Enterprise. You give me no choice, Captain. We are not bandits, but you force us to act as bandits.
This is the USS Enterprise.
Scotty, General Order Twenty Four. Two hours! In two hours!
Enterprise, this is Anan Seven, First Councilman of the High Council of Eminiar.
We hold your Captain, his party, your Ambassador and his party prisoners.
Unless you immediately start transportation of all personnel aboard your ship to the surface, the hostages will be killed. You have thirty minutes. I mean it, Captain.
All that it means is that I won't be around for the destruction. You heard me give General Order Twenty Four. That means in two hours the Enterprise will destroy Eminiar Seven.
Planetary defence System, open fire on the Enterprise!
I'm sorry, Councilman. The target has moved out of range.
You wouldn't do this. Hundreds of millions of people.
I didn't start it, Councilman, but I'm liable to finish it.
Councilman, I received a message from Vendikar. Our time is nearly up. Our quota is short by several thousand. They accuse us of reneging on the treaty.
You see? It's started.
You're wrong. It hasn't begun.
Councilman, Disintegrator station eleven has been destroyed. Guard positions in tunnels eight and ten fail to answer. Earth party reported seen in corridor 4A.
You have less than two hours, Councilman.
What I want or don't want has nothing to do with it. Escalation is automatic. You can stop it!
Stop it? I'm counting on it.
Open a channel, Lieutenant. This is the commander of the USS Enterprise.
All cities and installations on Eminiar Seven have been located, identified, and fed into our fire-control system. In one hour and forty five minutes
The entire inhabited surface of your planet will be destroyed.
You have that long to surrender your hostages.
What can I do? Somebody, please tell me.
Hold it! Over there. You, over there. Move, move, move.
Now we'll talk.
I had assumed you needed help. I see I'm in error.
No. I need the help. In there, Mister Spock.
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in, Scotty.
Aye, Captain, are you all right?
Everything's secure here. Maintain position. If everything goes according to plan, you can beam us up in ten minutes. If you don't hear from us, carry out General Order Twenty Four on schedule.
Aye, aye, Captain. Is there anything else we can do?
Cross your fingers. Kirk out. Death, destruction, disease, horror. That's what war is all about, Anan. That's what makes it a thing to be avoided. You've made it neat and painless. So neat and painless, you've had no reason to stop it. And you've had it for five hundred years. Since it seems to be the only way I can save my crew and my ship, I'm going to end it for you, one way or another. Mister Ambassador.
Yes, Captain.
Would you mind taking these people out into the corridor and holding them there.
Gentlemen, if you please.
(to Sar) You. Come with me. Mister Osborne.
Our communicators, weapons.
All right, Mister Spock.
These are the attack computers, Captain. That one's defence, that one computes the casualties. They're all tied in with a subspace transmission unit, which keeps them in constant contact with their Vendikan counterparts.
Yes, go on.
At the moment contact is broken, it abrogates the agreement between the two warring parties.
What are you going to do?
This one's the key. The circuit is now locked. Destroy this one, and they'll all go.
Good. Get him out of here.
Now wait a minute. Please, please!
Let's go.
Against the wall!
You realise what you have done?
Yes, I do. I've given you back the horrors of war. The Vendikans now assume that you've broken your agreement and that you're preparing to wage real war with real weapons. They'll want do the same. Only the next attack they launch will do a lot more than count up numbers in a computer. They'll destroy cities, devastate your planet. You of course will want to retaliate. If I were you, I'd start making bombs. Yes, Councilman, you have a real war on your hands. You can either wage it with real weapons, or you might consider an alternative. Put an end to it. Make peace. 
There can be no peace. Don't you see? We've admitted it to ourselves. We're a killer species. It's instinctive. It's the same with you. Your General Order Twenty Four.
All right. It's instinctive. But the instinct can be fought. We're human beings with the blood of a million savage years on our hands, but we can stop it. We can admit that we're killers, but we're not going to kill today. That's all it takes. Knowing that we won't kill today. Contact Vendikar. I think you'll find that they're just as terrified, appalled, horrified as you are, that they'll do anything to avoid the alternative I've given you. Peace or utter destruction. It's up to you.
As a third party interested only in peace and the establishment of normal relations, I should be glad to offer my services as negotiator between you and Vendikar. I've had some small experiences in such matters.
There may be a chance. We have a direct channel with Vendikar's High Council. It hasn't been used in centuries.
Then it's long overdue. Shall we go?
There's a chance it may work, Captain.
Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty?
Scott here, Captain.
Cancel implementation of General Order Twenty Four. Alert transporter room. We're ready to beam up.
Lay in a course for Argona Two, Navigator. Mister Scott.
Space details set, Captain.
Message from Eminiar Seven, Captain. Ambassador Fox reports negotiations underway with Vendikar. Outlook hopeful.
Good.
Captain, you took a big chance.
Did I, Mister Spock? They've been killing three million people a year. It had been going on for five hundred years. An actual attack wouldn't have killed any more people than one of their computer attacks, but it would have ended their ability to make war. The fighting would have been over permanently.
But you didn't know that it would work.
No. It was a calculated risk. Still, the Eminians keep a very orderly society, and actual war is a very messy business. A very, very messy business. I had a feeling that they would do anything to avoid it, even talk peace.
A feeling is not much to go on.
Sometimes a feeling, Mister Spock, is all we humans have to go on.
Captain, you almost make me believe in luck.
Why, Mister Spock, you almost make me believe in miracles.
This Side of Paradise
Approaching Omicron Ceti Three, sir.
Standard orbit, Mister Painter.
Yes, sir.
Captain.
Yes, Lieutenant.
I've been transmitting a contact signal every five minutes. All I get is dead air. Shall I continue?
Maintain transmission pattern until we've established orbit.
Aye, aye, sir.
Mister Spock, there were one hundred and fifty men, women, and children in that colony. What are the chances of survivors?
Absolutely none, Captain. Berthold rays are such a recent discovery. We do not yet have full knowledge of their nature. It is known, however, that living animal tissue disintegrates under exposure. Sandoval's group could not have survived after three years.
Are you saying that those people built a future in a place knowing they might not survive?
I am saying they knew there was a risk.
And what about us? Can we afford to send people to the planet's surface?
The breakdown of tissue does not develop immediately. We can risk a limited exposure.
We've established orbit, sir, and I've pinpointed a settlement.
Thank you, Mister Painter. Mister Spock, equip a landing party of five to accompany me to the planet's surface. Include Doctor McCoy and a biologist. I'll want them in ten minutes.
Another dream that failed. There's nothing sadder. It took these people a year to make the trip from Earth. They came all that way and died.
Hardly that, sir. Welcome to Omicron Ceti Three. I'm Elias Sandoval.
We haven't seen anyone outside our group for four years since we left Earth. We've been expecting someone for some time. Our subspace radio didn't work properly, and I'm afraid we didn't have anyone who could master its intricacies.
Actually, Mister Sandoval, we didn't come here because of your silent radio.
It makes little difference, Captain. You're here. We're happy to see you. Come, let me show you our settlement.
On pure speculation, just an educated guess, I'd say that man is alive.
Captain, this planet is being bombarded by Berthold rays, as our reports indicated. At this intensity, we'll be safe for a week if necessary. But
But these people shouldn't be alive.
Is it possible that they're not?
You shook hands with him, Jim. His flesh was warm. He's alive. There's no doubt about that.
There's also no question of the fact that Berthold rays are incontrovertibly deadly. There's no miracle connected with it, Doctor, you know that. No cures, no serums, no antidotes. If a man is exposed long enough, he dies.
Gentlemen, we're debating in a vacuum. Let's go get some answers.
There are two other settlements, but we have forty five colonists here.
What was the reason for the dispersal?
We felt three groups would have better potential. If disease were to strike one group, the others would be less likely to be affected. You see, Omicron is an ideal agricultural planet. We determined not to suffer the fate of expeditions that went before us.
Elias.
Leila, come meet our guests. This is Leila Kalomi, our botanist. This is Captain Kirk, Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock.
Mister Spock and I have met before. It's been a long time.
Mister Sandoval, we do have a mission here. Examinations, tests.
By all means, make them. I think you'll find our settlement an interesting one. Our philosophy is a simple one, that men should return to a less complicated life. We have few mechanical things here. No vehicles, no weapons. We have harmony here. Complete peace.
We'll try not to interfere with your work.
Make yourselves at home, gentlemen.
What exactly are we looking for anyway, sir?
Whatever doesn't look right, whatever that is. When it comes to farms, I wouldn't know what looked right or wrong if it were two feet from me.
(opening up the barn door) Hey.
What is it?
No cows. This barn isn't even built for them, Just for storage.
Come to think of it, we haven't seen any animals. No horses, no pigs, not even a dog. Nothing.
You've known the Vulcanian?
On Earth, six years ago.
Did you love him?
If I did, it was important only to myself.
How did he feel?
Mister Spock's feelings were never expressed to me. It is said he has none to give.
Would you like him to stay with us now, to be as one of us?
There is no choice, Elias. He will stay.
That'll be all. Thank you very much.
Anything?
I've examined nine men so far, varying in ages from twenty three to fifty nine. They're all in perfect condition. Text book responses. Heart, lungs, excellent. Co-ordination, excellent. Reflexes, excellent. If there are many more of them, I could throw away my shingle.
Kirk here.
Spock here, Captain. There seems to be a total absence of life on the planet, with the exception of the colonists and various types of flora.
Sulu had the same observation. Any explanations?
Not at the moment, sir. I am conducting various tests with the tricorder, but results are inconclusive.
Very well. Continue investigations. Kirk out.
No animals. That's peculiar.
Yes, especially in view of the fact that the records for this expedition indicate that they did have some for breeding and food purposes. Apparently, none of them survived.
I'd like to see the medical records on the expedition.
Yes, I thought you might.
Captain, I've been looking for you. You haven't seen our fields and crops. I'd like to show you and the Doctor what we've accomplished here.
I'm afraid I'll have to bow out. I have to continue with these medical examinations. However, if I find everyone else's health to be as perfect as yours, I
He promised to throw away his shingle.
You'll find no weaklings here. Captain.
This is the reason, Captain. This soil will grow anything we plant in it. It's a perfect world. We have a moderate climate, moderate rains all year round. It gives us all we need. It is perfect.
Pardon me, Captain. Biology report ready, sir.
I have work to attend to myself, Captain.
Go ahead, Lieutenant.
I heard Sandoval saying they could grow anything here. That's true, sir. They've got a variety of crops in. Grains, potatoes, beans.
Make your point.
Well, sir, for an agricultural colony, they have actually very little acreage planted. There's enough to sustain the colony, but very little more.
It's like a jigsaw puzzle all one colour. No key to where the pieces fit in. Why?
Kirk here.
This is McCoy, Jim. I think you'd better get back here.
Trouble?
No, but I'd like you to see this for yourself.
On my way.
Sandoval's medical record, four years ago when the expedition left Earth. He registered scar tissue on his lungs from lobar pneumonia suffered when he was a child. No major operations, but there was an appendectomy. Received all required inoculations, et cetera.
What's so strange about that?
Nothing, but I examined that man no more than two hours ago. You know what his readings were? Perfect, perfect, and perfect. Just like everyone else I've examined here.
Instrument malfunction?
No. I thought of that and tested it on myself. It accurately recorded my lack of tonsils and those two broken ribs I had once. It did not record the scar tissue on Sandoval's lungs, but it did record a healthy appendix where one was supposedly removed.
Nothing. Not even insects. Yet your plants grow, and you've survived exposure to Berthold rays.
That can be explained.
Please do.
Later.
I have never understood the female capacity to avoid a direct answer to any question.
And I never understood you. Until now. There was always a place in here where no one could come. There was only the face you allow people to see. Only one side you'd allow them to know.
I would like to know how your people have managed to survive here.
I missed you.
Logically, you should all be dead.
If I tell you how we survived, will you try to understand how we feel about our life here? About each other?
Emotions are alien to me. I'm a scientist.
Someone else might believe that. Your shipmates, your Captain, but not me. Come.
Mister Sandoval, within the hour I've received orders from Starfleet Command to evacuate all personnel from this colony. Naturally, you'll inform your people to begin preparations. We will have accommodations for you aboard the Enterprise.
No.
It's not an arbitrary decision on my part. I have my orders.
Captain, it's entirely unnecessary. We're in no danger here.
We've explained the Berthold rays to you and their effect. Can't you understand?
Doctor, how can I make you understand? Your own instruments have shown that we're all in perfect health. We've had no deaths here.
What about your animals?
We're vegetarians.
That doesn't answer my question, sir. Why did all your animals die?
Captain, you stress very unimportant matters. We will not leave.
It's not much further.
You've not yet explained the nature of this thing.
Its basic properties and elements are not important. What is important is it gives life, peace, love.
What you're describing was once known in the vernacular as a happiness pill. And you, as a scientist, should know that that's not possible.
Come. I was one of the first to find them. The spores.
Spores?
No.
It shouldn't hurt.
No, I can't. Please, don't!
Not like this. It didn't hurt us.
I am not like you.
Now. Now, you belong to all of us and we to you. There's no need to hide your inner face any longer. We understand.
I love you. I can love you.
Sandoval.
Captain, your arguments are very valid, but they do not apply to us.
You're being unreasonable.
Well, nevertheless. Excuse me.
Excuse me. My orders are to remove all the colonists. That's exactly what I intend to do, with or without your help.
Would you like to use a butterfly net on him, Captain?
No, I think we'll use a
Captain, we've checked out everything. It all seems normal, except for the absence of any animals.
We have orders to evacuate all colonists to Starbase Twenty Seven.
We haven't seen them since we began our check.
DeSalle said he was going to examine some native plants he found. Did Spock call in at all?
No, he didn't. (gets out communicator) Spock? See to the landing parties, would you, Mister Sulu.
Yes, sir.
Spock?
That one looks like a dragon. You see the tail and the dorsal spines?
I've never seen a dragon.
I have. On Berengaria Seven. But I've never stopped to look at clouds before. Or rainbows. You know, I can tell you exactly why one appears in the sky, but considering its beauty has always been out of the question.
Not here.
Spock!
Yes, what did you want?
Spock, is that you?
Yes, Captain. What did you want?
Where are you?
I don't believe I want to tell you.
Spock, I don't know what you think you're doing, but this is an order. Report back to me at the settlement in ten minutes. We're evacuating all colonists to Starbase Twenty Seven.
No, I don't think so.
You don't think so, what?
I don't think so, sir.
Spock, report to me immediately.
Spock? Acknowledge.
Spock. The frequency is open, but he doesn't answer.
That didn't sound at all like Spock, Jim.
No. I thought you said you might like him if he mellowed a little.
I didn't say that.
You said that.
Not exactly. He might be in trouble.
Yes, take over the landing party detail and start getting those colonists aboard.
How will you find Spock?
The frequency is open. It'll act as a homing device. Contact DeSalle. Have him meet you here. Make sure the landing party work in teams of two. I don't want anybody left alone down here.
Spock. (clears throat) Mister Spock.
What are you doing with those things, DeSalle?
I want you to take a close look at these, Doc. They're very interesting.
Mister Spock. Are you out of your mind? You were told to report to me at once.
I didn't want to, Jim.
You? Yes, I can see that. Miss Kalomi, you'll have to come back to the settlement and prepare to transport up to the ship.
There'll be no evacuation, Jim, but perhaps we should go back and get you straightened out.
Mister Sulu, Mister Spock is under arrest, and he's in your custody until we get back to the Enterprise.
Very well. Come with me.
What's?
Mister Sulu understands, don't you, Mister Sulu?
Yes, I see now. Of course we can't remove the colony. It'd be wrong.
I don't know what these plants are or how they work, but you're all going back to the settlement with me, and those colonists are going aboard the ship.
I can see the Captain is going to be difficult.
How many of those did you beam up?
Oh, must be nigh onto a hundred by now.
Hey, Doc, I'm ready to energise. Everything okay with those plants?
This is the Captain. Beam me up.
Well, sure, if you want.
I most certainly do. Energise.
Lieutenant, put me through to Admiral Komack at Starfleet.
Oh, I'm sorry, Captain. I can't do that.
What do you mean, you can't do that. Follow standard procedure. That's an order.
Oh, I know it is, Captain, but you see, all communications are out.
Out?
I short-circuited them, except ship to surface. We'll need that for a while. It's really for the best, Captain.
Get back to your stations. Get back to your stations.
I'm sorry, sir. We're all transporting down to join the colony.
I said get back to your station.
No, sir.
This is mutiny, mister.
Yes, sir. It is.
I'm not interested in any physical-psychological aspects, Jim boy. We all perfectly healthy down here.
I've heard that word a lot lately. Perfect. Everything's perfect.
Yeah. That's right. That's just what it is.
I'll bet you've even grown your tonsils back.
Sho'nuf. Hey, Jim boy, y'all ever have a real cold Georgia-style mint julep, huh?
Look, Bones, I need your help. Can you run tests, blood samples, anything at all to give us a lead on what these things are, how to counteract them?
Who wants to counteract paradise, Jim boy?
McCoy out.
Bones. Bones.
Almost the entire ship's complement has beamed down.
I'm very pleased. The entire landing operation is proceeding quite well.
Where's McCoy?
He went off to create something called a mint julep. That's a drink, Jim.
Captain, why don't you join us?
In your own private paradise.
The spores have made it that.
Where did they originate?
It's impossible to say. They drifted through space until they finally landed here. You see, they actually thrive on Berthold rays. The plants act as a repository for thousands of microscopic spores until they find a human body to inhabit.
In return, they give you complete health and peace of mind.
That's paradise?
We have no need or want, Captain.
It's a true Eden, Jim. There's belonging and love.
No wants. No needs. We weren't meant for that. None of us. Man stagnates if he has no ambition, no desire to be more than he is.
We have what we need.
Except a challenge.
You don't understand, Jim, but you'll come around sooner or later. Join us. Please.
I'm going back to the ship.
Engineering? Scotty? Biochemistry lab? Security? Is there anyone on board? This is the Captain.
Captain's log, stardate 3417.7. Except for myself, all crew personnel have transported to the surface of the planet. Mutinied. Lieutenant Uhura has effectively sabotaged the communications station. I can only contact the surface of the planet. The ship can be maintained in orbit for several months, but even with automatic controls, I cannot pilot her alone. In effect, I am marooned here. I'm beginning to realise just how big this ship really is, how quiet. I don't know how to get my crew back, how to counteract the effect of the spores. I don't know what I can offer against paradise.
Enterprise to Mister Spock.
Yes, Jim. What is it now?
I've joined you. I understand now.
Wonderful, Jim. When will you beam down?
There are some things in my quarters I want to pack.
Good. Leila and I will meet you at the beam down point.
Kirk out.
No. No! I can't leave! (he's very relieved) Emotions. Violent emotions. Needs. Anger. Captain's log, supplemental. I think I've discovered the answer, but to carry out my plan entails considerable risk. Mister Spock is much stronger than the ordinary human being. Aroused, his great physical strength could kill. But it's a risk I'll have to take.
Enterprise to Mister Spock.
Spock here.
It's Jim.
What's keeping you, Jim? We've been waiting.
I've been packing some things, and I realise there's some equipment here that we should have down at the settlement.
You know we can't come back on board once the last of us has left.
Do you want me to beam up a party?
No, I think you and I can handle it. Why don't you beam up now?
Just a moment. It won't take long. Do you mind?
I'll wait.
Ready to beam up, Jim.
(with a large metal bar in his hand) Energising.
All right, you mutinous, disloyal, computerised, half-breed, we'll see about you deserting my ship.
The term half-breed is somewhat applicable, but computerised is inaccurate. A machine can be computerised, not a man.
What makes you think you're a man? You're an overgrown jackrabbit, an elf with a hyperactive thyroid.
Jim, I don't understand.
Of course you don't understand. You don't have the brains to understand. All you have is printed circuits.
Captain, if you'll excuse me.
What can you expect from a simpering, devil-eared freak whose father was a computer and his mother an encyclopedia?
My mother was a teacher. My father an ambassador.
Your father was a computer, like his son. An ambassador from a planet of traitors. A Vulcan never lived who had an ounce of integrity.
Captain, please don't
You're a traitor from a race of traitors. Disloyal to the core, rotten like the rest of your subhuman race, and you've got the gall to make love to that girl.
That's enough.
Does she know what she's getting, Spock? A carcass full of memory banks who should be squatting in a mushroom, instead of passing himself off as a man? You belong in a circus, Spock, not a starship. Right next to the dog-faced boy.
Had enough? I didn't realise what it took to get under that thick hide of yours. Anyhow, I don't know what you're so mad about. It isn't every first officer who gets to belt his Captain several times.
You did that to me deliberately.
Believe me, Mister Spock, it was painful in more ways than one.
The spores. They're gone. I don't belong anymore.
You said they were benevolent and peaceful. Violent emotions overwhelm them, destroy them. I had to make you angry enough to shake off their influence. That's the answer, Mister Spock.
That may be correct, Captain, but trying to initiate a brawl with over five hundred crewmen and colonists is hardly logical.
I had something else in mind. Can you put together a subsonic transmitter. Something we can hook into the communications station and broadcast over the communicator?
It can be done.
Good. Let's get to work.
Captain. Striking a fellow officer is a court martial offence.
Well, if we're both in the Brig, who's going to build the subsonic transmitter?
That is quite logical, Captain.
Well now, it's a little early to be counting stars, Miss Leila.
I'm waiting for Mister Spock and the Captain to transport down. They had some equipment to be moved. But it's been so long. I wish he'd come back.
Well, now, I think I can fix that for you. Enterprise?
Enterprise. Spock here.
This is Leila. I borrowed the doctor's communicator. I was worried something might have happened to you.
You are all right, aren't you?
Yes. Yes. I'm quite well.
Can I come aboard? I've never seen a starship before
and I want to talk to you.
Are you still at the beam down point, and is the doctor there?
Yes to both questions.
Give your communicator back to Doctor McCoy. You won't need it to beam up. It'll take a few moments. Just wait there. Out.
Mister Spock, Miss Kalomi is strictly your concern, but should you talk to her while she's still under the influence of the spores?
I'll be back shortly, Captain.
You're no longer with us, are you? I felt something was wrong.
It was necessary.
Come back to the planet with me. You can belong again. Come back with me, please.
I can't.
I love you. I said that six years ago, and I can't seem to stop repeating myself. On Earth, you couldn't give anything of yourself. You couldn't even put your arms around me. We couldn't have anything together there. We couldn't have anything together anyplace else. We're happy here. (crying) I can't lose you now, Mister Spock. I can't.
I have a responsibility to this ship, to that man on the Bridge. I am what I am, Leila, and if there are self-made purgatories, then we all have to live in them. Mine can be no worse than someone else's.
I have lost you, haven't I? And not only you, I've lost all of it. The spores. I've lost them, too.
The Captain discovered that strong emotions and needs destroy the spore influence.
And this is for my good? Do you mind if I say I still love you? You never told me if you had another name, Mister Spock.
(wiping away her tears) You couldn't pronounce it.
They'll not hear this, of course. It'll be more a sensation of feeling it.
As though somebody had put itching powder on their skin.
Precisely. It should begin to work on their nerves in a few minutes.
What do you think you're doing?
I said I was sorry.
More like you're clumsy.
If you hadn't gotten in my way
Come on. Break it up. Break it up.
Well, Doctor, I've been thinking about what sort of work I could assign you to.
What do you mean, what sort of work? I'm a doctor.
Not any more, of course. We don't need you. Not as a doctor.
Oh, no? Would you like to see how fast I can put you in a hospital?
I am the leader of this colony. I'll assign you whatever work I think suitable.
Just a minute. You'd better make me a mechanic. Then I can treat little tin gods like you. (He punches Elias) Sorry, Sandoval. I don't know what made me do that.
We've done nothing here. No accomplishments, no progress. Three years wasted. We wanted to make this planet a garden.
You can't stay here. You can't survive without the spores. After you've cleared at the Starbase, you could be relocated. It depends upon what you want.
I think I'd, I think we'd like to get some work done. The work we started out to do.
Enterprise.
Enterprise. Spock here.
This is McCoy. Sandoval would like to talk to the Captain.
Just a moment. They're all beginning to call in, Captain. Rather contritely, I should say. Sandoval wishes to speak to you.
Put him on the speaker. Kirk here.
Oh, Captain, as I understood it, you were to transport us to Starbase Twenty Seven. We'll give you every co-operation.
Start making preparations, Mister Sandoval. We'll begin transporting your people aboard as soon as more of our crew checks in.
Well, Jim, I've just examined the last of the colonists, and they're all in absolutely perfect, perfect health. A fringe benefit left over by the spores.
Good.
Well, that's the second time man's been thrown out of paradise.
No, no, Bones. This time we walked out on our own. Maybe we weren't meant for paradise. Maybe we were meant to fight our way through. Struggle, claw our way up, scratch for every inch of the way. Maybe we can't stroll to the music of the lute. We must march to the sound of drums.
Poetry, Captain. Non-regulation.
We haven't heard much from you about Omicron Ceti Three, Mister Spock.
I have little to say about it, Captain, except that for the first time in my life I was happy.
The Devil In The Dark
Who's there?
(enters with a lot of men) It's your relief, Sam. All quiet?
Didn't see a thing, Chief.
Nobody ever does. Whatever the thing is, it's already killed fifty people. I never realised before how dark it is down here.
Stay on your toes, Schmitter. Keep your phaser in your hand at all times.
What good will that do? You saw what happened to Ed Appel when he shot at it. How about those other people before the monster got them?
I'm sorry, Schmitter. I know how you feel, but we've got to have guards.
Okay, Chief. I'll do what I can.
Keep alert. If you hear anything or see anything, call in. Somebody can arrive in three minutes.
A lot can happen in three minutes. Chief, is it true the Enterprise is on its way?
It's coming.
You think it could get here in the next four hours?
You'll be all right.
Come on.
Schmitter. Like the rest of them. Burned to a crisp.
All right, let's assume there is a monster. What has it done? When did it start?
About three months ago, we opened up a new level. Sensors gave us an unusually rich pergium reading. Not only pergium, whatever you want. Uranium, sirium, platinum. The whole planet's like that. It's a treasure house.
Yes, we're aware of that. If mining conditions weren't so difficult, Janus Six could supply the mineral needs of a thousand planets. But what happened?
First, the automatic machinery, piece by piece, started to almost disintegrate. Metal began dissolving away. There was no reason for it, and our chemists were unable to analyse the corrosive agent.
I'm sure there is an answer. It simply has not yet been discovered.
Yes, it has. I don't know what this butchering monster is, but I know what it's doing. Our maintenance engineers sent down to the drifts to repair the corroded machinery. We found them seared to a crisp.
Volcanic activity?
There is no current volcanic activity on this planet, Captain.
He's right. None. At first the deaths were down deep, but they've been moving up toward our levels. The last man died two days ago three levels below this.
Same way? Burned?
I'd like to examine the body.
We kept it for you. There isn't much left. Roberts will show you. (McCoy and the guard leave) It isn't pretty.
Do you post sentries? Guards?
Of course. Five of them have died.
Who else has seen this?
(entering) I have.
This is Ed Appel, chief processing engineer.
Describe it.
I can't. I only got a glimpse of it, but it's big and shaggy.
Ed shot it.
Oh. You mean shot at it.
No. I mean shot it. With this. (a hand phaser)
Fascinating.
A good, clean shot. Didn't even slow it down. Well, I've made my report to you. Production has stopped, nobody will go into the lower levels, and I don't blame them. If the Federation wants pergium, then you're going to have to do something about it.
That's why we're here, Mister Vanderberg.
You're all pretty tough, aren't you? Starship, phaser banks. You can't get your starship down in the tunnels.
I don't think we'll need to, Mister Appel. Mister Vanderberg, we'll need a complete subsurface chart of all the drifts, galleries and tunnels.
You'll get it.
(examining a large globe from Vanderberg's desk) Mister Vanderberg, what is this?
It's a silicon nodule. There are a millions of them are down there. No commercial value.
But a geological oddity, to say the least. Pure silicon?
A few trace elements. Look, we didn't call you here so you could collect rocks.
Thank you, Mister Vanderberg. We'll need your complete co-operation.
You'll have it. Just find that creature, whatever it is. I've got a quota to meet. Come on, Appel.
The vast number of tunnels won't make our hunting any easier. Doc?
Schmitter didn't burn to death, not in the usual sense, anyway.
Explain.
Well, there are only fragments of bone and teeth left, but the plant's physician agrees with me. A chemical corrosion. Almost as if he'd been thrown into a vat of extremely corrosive acid.
Strong enough to eat machinery?
Strong enough to eat anything else that you can think of.
Mister Spock. 
(at the mine map) I've charted the positions of the deaths and acts of sabotage. Here, here, and here. If the times of these incidents are to be accepted as accurate, the creature would have to have moved at an incredible rate of speed.
Mister Vanderberg, how recent are these charts?
(reentering) They were made last year.
Before the appearance of whatever it is?
That's right.
I see. Mister Spock give us a report on life beneath the surface.
We can't cover tunnel by tunnel on foot. We must get production going again. We must have that pergium.
If we could force another appearance of this creature
When that creature appears, men die.
Too many tunnels. We couldn't possibly. Mister Spock, our sensors can pick up normal life functions at a considerable distance, but what about abnormal life functions?
Something's happening in the reactor room!
Back to your stations. Look at that.
I wouldn't touch it, Captain. An extremely active corrosive. Traces may linger.
Kirk, quickly!
The main circulating pump for the entire reactor is gone.
The same indication as shown at the door, Captain. A very strong corrosive.
Is there a replacement for that?
No, none. It's outdated, but we never had any trouble with it.
Spock, on board?
Nothing for a device this antiquated, Captain.
Without the pump mechanism, the reactor will go supercritical. It could poison half the planet. We can't shut it down. It provides heat and air and life support for the whole colony.
Mister Spock, we seem to have been given a choice. Death by asphyxiation or death by radiation poisoning.
A PXK pergium reactor? No, sir. We don't have any spare circulating pump for a thing like that. I haven't seen a PXK in twenty years.
Can you rig one up? It's vital.
Well sir, I can put together some odds and ends, but it won't hold for long.
How long?
Forty eight hours maybe, with a bit of luck.
Forty eight hours is better than nothing. Gather what you need and beam down here with it.
Top priority.
Aye, Captain.
I'll be right down. Scott out.
What happens when it breaks down?
Hopefully we'll have found the missing part by then.
Hopefully. Small chance.
We'll have to, Chief. The alternative is to evacuate all you people up to the Enterprise. A dozen planets depend on you for pergium for their reactor. They're already screaming. Reactors closing down, life support systems
I'm concerned with my people right here, Kirk. They're being murdered. You find that monster and kill it.
The missing pump wasn't taken by accident. It was the one piece of equipment absolutely essential for the operation of the reactor.
Do you think the creature is trying to push the colonists off the planet?
It would seem so.
But why now, Mister Spock? These production facilities have been in operation for over fifty years.
I don't know. But there is a possibility.
What's that?
Life as we know it is universally based on some combination of carbon compounds, but what if life exists based on another element? For instance, silicon.
You're creating fantasies, Mister Spock.
Not necessarily, Bones. I've heard of the theoretical possibility of life based on silicon. A silicon-based life would be of an entirely different order. It's possible that our phasers might not affect it.
Certainly not phaser one, which is far less powerful than phaser two.
All right, how about this? A creature that lives deep in the planet below us, at home in solid rock. It seems to me that in order to survive, it would have to have some form of natural armour plating.
It could explain much, especially since the colonists are armed only with phaser one.
But our people have phaser number two.
Which I could adjust to be more effective against silicon.
Silicon-based life is physiologically impossible, especially in an oxygen atmosphere.
It may be, Doctor, that the creature can exist for brief periods in such an atmosphere before returning to its own environment.
I still think you're imagining things.
You may be right, Doctor, but at least it's something to go on. Mister Spock, have Lieutenant Commander Giotto assemble the security troops and arm them with phaser number two. You make the proper adjustments. You seem fascinated by this rock.
Yes, Captain. You recall that Vanderberg commented there were thousands of these at a lower level, the level which the machinery opened just prior to the first appearance of the creature.
Do they tie in?
I don't know.
Speculate.
I have already given Doctor McCoy sufficient cause for amusement. I'd prefer to cogitate the possibilities for a time.
A short time, Mister Spock. We have very little.
How's it going, Scotty?
Well sir, it's a plumber's nightmare, but it'll hold for a bit.
It has to hold longer than a bit.
Sorry, sir. That's about the best I can do, but I guarantee it's not good enough.
(answers comm. beep) Kirk here.
Captain, the security officers have gathered in Chief Vanderberg's office.
I'll be right there. Kirk out. Scotty, ride herd on it. Kind words. Tender, loving care. Kiss it. Baby it. Flatter it if you have to, but keep it going.
I'll do what I can, sir.
You will proceed from level to level, checking out every foot, every opening. You are searching for some sort of creature which is highly resistant to phaser fire. Phasers will be set on maximum, and remember this. Fifty people have died. I want no more deaths.
Except the bloody thing.
The creature may or may not attack on sight. However, you must. It is vitally important we get this installation back into production.
Mister Vanderberg, may I ask at which level you discovered the nodules of silicon?
The twenty-third. Why?
Aye, aye, sir. May I ask if you have reason to suspect this creature may be on that level?
It's one of the possibilities we've discussed. (to Vanderberg) I want your people to stay on the top level, together at a safe place.
I don't know any safe place, Captain, the way that thing comes and goes.
Well, gentlemen, you have your instructions. Let's get at it.
Mister Spock? Find something?
Adjusting my tricorder to register for silicon, Captain. Interesting.
Traces?
A life form, Captain. Bearing one hundred eleven degrees, elevation four degrees.
One of our people?
No, sir. Silicon.
Come on.
He never even had a chance to fire, Captain.
It's only been seconds since we heard him scream. The creature must still be around.
Captain.
This tunnel. My readings indicate it was made within the hour. Moments ago, in fact.
Are you certain?
Positive.
This tunnel goes back as far as the eye can see. Our best machinery couldn't cut a tunnel like this, not even with phasers.
Indeed, Captain. I'm quite at a loss.
Gone.
Disappeared. Astonishing that anything of that bulk could move so rapidly.
These walls are hot.
Indeed. This tunnel was cut within the last two minutes.
Yes, perfectly.
Did you see it?
Yes, we saw it. Where does the tunnel go?
Readings indicate a maze of tunnels of this general category in that direction.
Did you shoot at it?
Yes. We took a bite out of it.
It's not animal tissue. What is it?
The closest approximation I could come to would be fibrous asbestos. A mineral, Captain.
Then your guess was right.
It would seem so. Silicon-based.
Summation.
We are dealing with a silicon creature of the deep rocks, capable of moving through solid rock as easily as we move through the air.
That would account for the tunnels.
Correct. This creature's body secretes an extremely powerful corrosive.
Powerful enough to dissolve the door of the reactor chamber.
And it explains the murdered men.
It's definitely phaser resistant. We had our weapons set for silicon and on full power, yet we only damaged it. It still lives.
No. No, it might require amassed phasers.
Or a single phaser with much longer contact.
Commander, pass this on to your men We knew it was a killer. Now it's wounded, probably in pain somewhere back there. There's nothing more dangerous than a wounded animal. Commander Giotto, instruct your men to concentrate the search in this sector. Remind them the creature is wounded.
Aye, aye, sir.
What is it, Mister Spock?
I've run a complete spherical check on all life forms, radius one hundred miles. I've located our men, all of them, and I've located one creature moving rapidly through native rock, bearing two hundred and one. And that is all.
One creature in a hundred miles?
Exactly. Captain, there are literally thousands of these tunnels in this general area alone, far too many to be cut by the one creature in an ordinary lifetime.
Then we're dealing with more than one creature, despite your tricorder readings, or we have a creature with an extremely long life span.
Or it is the last of a race of creatures which made these tunnels. If so, if it is the only survivor of a dead race, to kill it would be a crime against science.
Mister Spock, our mission is to protect this colony, to get the pergium moving again. This is not a zoological expedition. Maintain a constant reading on the creature. If we have to, we'll use phasers to cut our own tunnels. We'll try to surround it. I'm sorry, Mister Spock, but I'm afraid the creature must die.
I see no alternative myself, Captain. It merely seems a pity. The search team is gathering in the main tunnel.
Good.
So it is wounded, and therefore twice as dangerous. Stay in pairs. If you see it, concentrate your phaser fire at what appears to be its head. Concentrate it. Maintain it. It is definitely resistant, but it can be hurt. And if it can be hurt, it can be killed. Mister Spock.
Gentlemen, if you'll examine your charts, please. I last located the creature in the area marked adit26 moving in bearing two zero one. This particular group will move out beyond that area in all directions in an effort to surround it, and possibly capture it.
Your orders are shoot to kill. Protect yourself at all times. Commander Giotto, disperse your search parties.
Aye, aye, sir. Louis, Vinci, take your men out.
Mister Spock. Capture it? I don't recall giving any such order.
You did not, sir. I merely thought that if the opportunity arose
I will lose no more men. The creature will be killed on sight and that's the end of it.
Very well, sir.
Mister Spock. I want you to assist Scotty in maintaining that makeshift circulating pump.
II beg your pardon, sir?
You heard me. It's vital that we keep that reactor in operation. Your scientific knowledge
Is not needed there, sir. Mister Scott has far more knowledge of nuclear reactors than I do. You're aware of that.
Mister Spock, you are second in command. This will be a dangerous hunt. Either one of us by himself is expendable. Both of us are not.
Captain, there are approximately one hundred of us engaged in this search, against one creature. The odds against you and I both being killed are 2,228.7 to 1.
2,228.7 to 1? Those are pretty good odds, Mister Spock.
And they are of course accurate, Captain.
Of course. Well, I hate to use the word, but logically, with those kind of odds, you might as well stay. But please stay out of trouble, Mister Spock.
That is always my intention, Captain.
Kirk here.
Scotty here, Captain. My brilliant improvisation Just gave up the ghost. It couldn't stand the strain.
Can you fix it again?
Negative, Captain. It's gone for good.
Start immediate evacuation of all colonists to the Enterprise.
Not all of them, Captain. I and some of my key personnel are staying.
We'll be down to join you.
We haven't enough phasers for you.
Then we'll use clubs. We're not being chased away from here. We're staying.
Good. Get everybody else aboard the Enterprise. The fewer people we have breathing the air down here, the longer the rest of us will be able to hold out. How much longer, Scotty?
The reactor will go super-critical in about ten hours, Sir. You have that long to find the mechanism.
We'll do our best. Start feeding us constant status reports, Scotty. Vanderberg, you and your crew assemble at level twenty three, checkpoint Tiger. Kirk out.
Team up with the Enterprise security personnel. They're better armed than you. Keep someone in sight at all times. Vanderberg, take two men. Go through that tunnel there. Rendezvous with Commander Giotto. Appel and the rest of the men, go through there and tie up with Lieutenant Osborne's detail. Mister Spock and I will control the operation from a central point. That's all.
Mister Spock?
Captain, we are being watched.
Are you sure? Intuition?
No, sir. We're being watched.
Captain. Fresh readings within the hour in each of these tunnels.
The chart says both of these tunnels converge a few thousand yards further. You take the left. I'll take the right.
Should we separate?
Two tunnels, two of us. We separate.
Mister Spock.
Yes, Captain.
I've found a whole layer of these silicon nodules of yours, hundreds of them.
Indeed? I find that most illuminating, Captain.
Be absolutely certain you do not damage any of them.
Explain.
Only a theory I have.
Captain? Are you all right? Jim? Jim!
Yes, Mister Spock, I'm all right. We seem to have had a cave-in.
I could phaser you out.
No. No, no, you'd better not. Any disturbance might bring down the rest of the wall.
Besides, it isn't necessary. The chart said the tunnels meet further on.
Very well, but I find it extremely disquieting that your roof chose that particular moment to collapse. Please proceed with extreme caution. I shall quicken my pace.
Very well, Mister Spock. I'll meet you at the other end.
Captain, I just read some fresh signs.
The creature is in this area. I'll take a lifeform reading.
It's not necessary, Mister Spock. I know exactly where the creature is.
Where, Captain?
Ten feet away from me.
Kill it, Captain, quickly.
It's not making any threatening moves, Spock.
You don't dare take the chance, Captain.
Kill it.
I thought you were the one who wanted it kept alive, captured if possible.
Jim, your life is in danger. You can't take the risk.
It seems to be waiting.
I remind you it's a proven killer. I'm on my way. Spock out.
(sitting down) Well, what do we do, just talk it over?
Well, you can be hurt, can't you? We just sit here? It's your move.
No, no! Don't shoot. Come on over, Mister Spock.
Fascinating. It's made no moves against you?
No. It seems to be waiting. I tried talking to it, but it didn't do any good.
Yes, they're all through here, all over the place. Thousands of them.
Yes, I see.
Does it means something to you?
Possibly the answer, Captain, but I'm not certain. Captain, you are aware of the Vulcan technique of the joining of two minds.
You think you can get through to that thing?
It's possible.
Mister Spock, I know it's a terrible personal lowering of mental barriers but if there's a chance
I'll try.
Pain! Pain! Pain! (he staggers back) That's all I got, Captain. Waves and waves of searing pain. It's in agony.
No kill I. What is that, a plea for us not to kill it, or a promise that it won't kill us?
I don't know, Captain. Evidently, it gained an immediate knowledge of us from its empathy with me. In my brief contact with the creature's mind, I discovered it is a highly intelligent, extremely sophisticated animal. In great pain, of course, because of its wound, but not reacting at all like a wounded creature. It calls itself a Horta.
A Horta. A Horta! Mister Spock, we need that retardation mechanism. You must re-establish communications with it.
Captain, it has no reason to give us the device, and apparently every reason for wishing us off this planet.
Yes, I'm aware of that. If we could only win its confidence. Doctor McCoy, this is Captain Kirk.
Yes, Captain?
Grab your medical kit and come down here on the double. I've got a patient for you.
Is somebody injured? What happened?
Never mind. Just come down to the twenty third level. You'll be led to us by tricorder readings. Kirk out.
Jim, I remind you that this is a silicon-based form of life. Doctor McCoy's medical knowledge will be totally useless.
He's a healer, let him heal. Mister Spock, you must re-establish communications. I want to know why it suddenly took to murder.
To obtain that kind of communication, Captain, it will be necessary to touch it.
We've seen how the creature destroys.
Lieutenant Commander Giotto.
Giotto here, Captain. Are you all right?
Perfectly all right. Where are you?
We're at the end of the tunnel. Mister Vanderberg and his men are here, and they're pretty ugly. Shall I let them through?
Under no circumstances allow them in here yet. The minute Doc McCoy gets there, send him through.
Aye, aye, sir.
Murder. Of thousands. Devils! Eternity ends. The chamber of the ages. The altar of tomorrow! Murderers! Stop them. Kill! Strike back! Monsters!
What in the name of? What is Spock doing?
It's wounded. Badly. You've got to help it.
Help that?
Go take a look.
The end of life. Murderers.
You can't be serious. That thing is virtually made out of stone!
Help it. Treat it.
I'm a doctor, not a bricklayer.
You're a healer. There's a patient. That's an order. Mister Spock. Tell it we're trying to help. The mechanism.
Understood. It is the end of life. Eternity stops. Go out into the tunnel. To the chamber of the ages. Cry for the children. Walk carefully in the vault of tomorrow. Sorrow for the murdered children. The thing you search for is there. Go. Go. Sadness. Sadness for the end of things. Go into the tunnel. There is a passageway. Quickly, quickly.
The Captain said for you to wait here, and here is where you'll wait.
That murdering monster's in there and we're going to kill it.
You're going to stay here.
(into communicator) That's right, Lieutenant. Just beam it down to me immediately, and never mind what I want it for. I just want it! Now move!
(channeling the Horta) It is time to sleep. It is over. Failure. The murderers have won. Death is welcome. Let it end here.
Mister Spock. Mister Spock. Spock. Spock! Come out of it. I found the unit in there. It's in pretty good shape. I also found about a million of these silicon nodules. They're eggs, aren't they?
Yes, Captain, eggs and about to hatch.
The miners must have broken into the hatchery. Their operations destroyed thousands of them. No wonder.
There. They're coming.
All right! All right, let's go!
Come on.
How are you doing, Doc?
I'll let you know.
Don't fire. First man that fires is dead.
That thing has killed fifty of my men.
You've killed thousands of her children.
What?
Those round silicon nodules that you've been collecting and destroying? They're her eggs. Tell them, Mister Spock.
There have been many generations of Horta on this planet. Every fifty thousand years, the entire race dies, all but one, like this one, but the eggs live. She cares for them, protects them. And when they hatch, she is the mother to them, thousands of them. This creature here is the mother of her race.
The Horta is intelligent, peaceful, mild. She had no objection to sharing this planet with you, till you broke into her nursery and started destroying her eggs. Then she fought back in the only way she knew how, as any mother would fight when her children are in danger.
We didn't know. How could we? You mean if these eggs hatch, there'll be thousands of those things crawling around down here?
This is where they live. They digest rock, they tunnel for nourishment.
And they are the most inoffensive of creatures. They harbour ill will towards no one.
Now look, we have pergium to deliver.
Yes, I know. Here's your circulating pump. You've complained this planet is a mineralogical treasure house if you had the equipment to get at it. Gentlemen, the Horta moves through rock the way we move through air, and it leaves tunnels. The greatest natural miners in the universe. It seems to me we could make an agreement, reach a modus vivendi. They tunnel. You collect and process, and your process operation would be a thousand times more profitable.
Sounds all right, if it will work.
Except for one thing. The Horta is badly wounded. It may die.
It won't die. By golly, Jim, I'm beginning to think I can cure a rainy day.
Can you help it?
Help it? I cured it.
How?
Well, I had the ship beam down a hundred pounds of that thermoconcrete. You know, the kind we use to build emergency shelters out of. It's mostly silicone. So I just trowelled it into the wound, and it'll act like a bandage until it heals. Take a look. It's as good as new.
Well, Spock, I'm going to have to ask you to get in touch with the Horta again. Tell her our proposition. She and her children can do all the tunnelling they want. Our people will remove the minerals, and each side will leave the other alone. Think she'll go for it?
It seems logical, Captain. The Horta has a very logical mind. And after close association with humans, I find that curiously refreshing.
Ship ready to leave orbit, Captain. Course laid in.
Very good, Mister Spock.
Chief Engineer Vanderberg standing by on channel one.
Fine. Yes, Chief. Kirk here.
Just wanted to tell you the eggs have started to hatch, Captain.
First thing the little devils do is start to tunnel.
We've already hit huge new pergium deposits. I'm afraid to tell you how much gold and platinum and rare earths we've uncovered.
I'm delighted to hear that, Chief. Once Mother Horta tells her kids what to look for, you people are going to be embarrassingly rich.
You know, the Horta aren't so bad once you're used to their appearance.
Well. that's about it, Kirk. Thanks for everything.
Our pleasure, Chief. Kirk out.
Curious. What Chief Vanderberg said about the Horta is exactly what the Mother Horta said to me. She found humanoid appearance revolting, but she thought she could get used to it.
Oh, she did, did she? Now tell me, did she happen to make any comment about those ears?
Not specifically, but I did get the distinct impression she found them the most attractive human characteristic of all. I didn't have the heart to tell her that only I have
She really liked those ears?
Captain, the Horta is a remarkably intelligent and sensitive creature, with impeccable taste.
Because she approved of you?
Really, Captain, my modesty
Does not bear close examination, Mister Spock. I suspect you're becoming more and more human all the time.
Captain, I see no reason to stand here and be insulted.
Ahead, warp factor two.
Errand of Mercy
Captain, we've reached the designated position for scanning the coded directive tape.
Good. (puts it into a decoder) We both guessed right. Negotiations with the Klingon Empire are on the verge of breaking down. Starfleet Command anticipates a surprise attack. We are to proceed to Organia and take whatever steps are necessary to prevent the Klingons from using it as a base.
Strategically sound. Organia is the only Class M planet in the disputed area, ideally located for use by either side.
Organia's description, Mister Spock.
Inhabited by humanoids. A very peaceful, friendly people living on a primitive level. Little of intrinsic value. Approximately Class D minus on Richter's scale of cultures.
Another Armenia, Belgium.
Sir?
The weak innocents who always seem to be located on the natural invasion routes.
Captain, the automatic deflector screen just popped on. Body approaching.
Configuration, Mister Sulu.
Phaser banks, lock on. Return fire. Maintain firing rate. One hundred percent dispersal pattern.
We've hit him, Captain. He's hurt.
Damage control, report to the first officer.
Captain, the other ship doesn't register. Only drifting debris. We got him.
All hands, maintain general alert. Hold battle stations. Damage report, Mister Spock.
Minor, Captain. We were most fortunate. Blast damage in decks ten and eleven, minor buckling in the antimatter pods, casualties very light.
Maintain surveillance, Mister Sulu.
No contact, Captain. He blew up all right.
Well, we've been anticipating an attack. I'd say what we've just experienced very nearly qualifies.
Yes. It would seem to be an unfriendly act.
Automatic all-points relay from Starfleet Command, Captain, code one.
Well, there it is. War. We didn't want it, but we've got it.
Curious how often you humans manage to obtain that which you do not want.
War or not, we've still got a job to do. Denying Organia to the Klingons.
With the outbreak of hostilities, that might not be easy.
Lay in a course for Organia, Mister Sulu.
Aye, aye, sir.
Negotiating with the Organians will be time-consuming, Captain, and time is one thing we'll have the least of.
We won't get it by talking about it. The trigger's been pulled. We have to get there before the hammer falls. Ahead warp factor seven.
Captain. Unit XY-75847 report a fleet of Klingon ships in their sector, sir.
What bearing?
Unable to ascertain, sir.
Mister Sulu, have the phaser crews stand by their positions. Full power deflector screens.
Yes, sir.
Mister Spock and I are going to the planet's surface. You will be in command. Your responsibility is to the Enterprise, not to us. Is that clear?
Perfectly, sir.
The Klingon fleet is in this quadrant. We know that Organia will be a target. If they should emerge
We'll handle them, sir.
You will evaluate the situation. If there is a fleet of them, you'll get out of here, Mister Sulu.
But, Captain
No buts. You'll get to safety and alert the fleet. You will not attack alone. Mister Spock and I will be all right. Mister Spock, let's you and I pay the Organians a visit.
You'd think they had people beaming down every day.
Yes. Curious lack of interest. Notice the ruins in the distance, Captain. Quite large.
Yes. A fortress, perhaps. A castle.
Whatever it is, it would seem to be inconsistent with the reports we've been given on this culture.
Welcome.
Reception committee?
It would seem so.
You are our visitors. Welcome, welcome. I am Ayelborne.
I am Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the United Federation of Planets. This is my first officer Mister Spock.
You are most welcome, my friend.
I would like to speak to someone in authority.
We don't have anybody in authority, but I am the chairman of the Council of Elders. Perhaps I would do.
You people are in great danger. Is there someplace we can go and talk?
Oh, yes. Our council chambers are nearby. Please.
Captain, if you don't mind, I should like to wander about the village and make some studies.
Of course, my friend. Our village is yours. Captain.
Gentlemen, my government has informed me that the Klingons are expected to move against your planet with the objective of making it a base of operation against the Federation. My mission, frankly, is to keep them from doing it.
What you're saying, Captain, is that we seem to have a choice between dealing with you or your enemies.
No, sir. With the Federation, you have a choice. You have none with the Klingons. The Klingons are a military dictatorship. War is their way of life. Life under the Klingon rule would be very unpleasant. We offer you protection.
We thank you for your altruistic offer, Captain, but we really do not need your protection.
We are a simple people, Captain. We have nothing that anybody could want.
You have this planet and its strategic location. I assure you that if you don't take action to prevent it, the Klingons will move against you as surely as your sun rises. We will help you build defences, build facilities.
We have no defences, Captain, nor are any needed.
Gentlemen, I have seen what the Klingons do to planets like yours. They are organised into vast slave labour camps. No freedoms whatsoever. Your goods will be confiscated. Hostages taken and killed, your leaders confined. You'd be far better off on a penal planet. Infinitely better off.
Captain, we see that your concern is genuine. We are moved. But again we assure you we are in absolutely no danger. If anybody is in danger, you are, and that concerns us greatly. It would be better if you returned to your ship as soon as possible.
You keep insisting there's no danger. I keep assuring you there is. Would you mind telling me
It is our way of life, Captain.
That's the first thing that would be lost! Excuse me, gentlemen. I'm a soldier, not a diplomat. I can only tell you the truth.
If you will excuse us, Captain, we will discuss your kind offer.
Certainly.
Captain, our information on these people and their culture was not correct. This is not a primitive society making progress toward mechanisation. They are totally stagnant. There is no evidence of any progress as far back as my tricorder can register.
That doesn't seem likely.
Nevertheless, it is true. For tens of thousands of years, there has been absolutely no advancement, no significant change in their physical environment. This is a laboratory specimen of an arrested culture.
Thank you, Mister Spock. That might be useful.
We have discussed your offer, Captain. Our opinion is unchanged. We are in no danger. We thank you for your kind offer of assistance, although we must decline it, and we strongly recommend that you leave Organia before you yourselves are endangered.
Gentlemen, I must get you to reconsider. We can be of immense help to you. In addition to military aid, we can send you specialists, technicians. We can show you how to feed a thousand people where one was fed before. We can help you build schools, educate the young in the latest technological and scientific skills. Your public facilities are almost non-existent. We can help you remake your world, end disease, hunger, hardship. All we ask in return is that you let us help you. Now.
Captain, I can see that you do not understand us. Perhaps
(answering communicator) Excuse me, sir. Kirk here.
Captain, a large number of Klingon vessels have just arrived.
They're opening fire.
Positive identification?
Yes, sir. My screens are up. I can't drop them to beam you aboard.
Mister Sulu, follow your orders. Get out of here. Contact the fleet. Return if the odds are more equal. Kirk out. Gentlemen, you kept insisting that there was no danger
That is correct, Captain. There is no danger.
Ayelborne, eight space vehicles have assumed orbit around our planet. They are activating their material transmission units.
Thank you, Trefayne.
Can you verify that?
Negative, Captain, but it seems a logical development.
Captain, since it is too late for you to escape, perhaps we should do something about protecting you.
If you had listened to me
We must be sure you are not harmed.
Ayelborne, several hundred men have appeared near the citadel. They bring many weapons.
How does he know that?
Oh, our friend Trefayne is really quite intuitive. You can rest assured that what he says is absolutely correct.
So we're stranded here, in the middle of a Klingon occupation army.
So it would seem. Not a very pleasant prospect.
You have a gift for understatement, Mister Spock. It's not a very pleasant prospect at all.
Captain, our phasers are gone.
Did you take them?
Yes, Captain. I took them.
I must ask you to return them.
I'm sorry, Captain. I cannot do that. Were you armed, you might be tempted to use violence, and that we cannot permit. You, Captain, will pass as an Organian, and Mister Spock. Mister Spock presents a problem. He doesn't look like an Organian.
A Vulcan trader, perhaps. A dealer in kevas and trillium. Harmless to the Klingons.
They know that Vulcan is a member of the Federation.
Vulcan merchants are not uncommon, Captain. It is a practical approach.
What about the rest of you?
We shall continue as before. We have nothing to fear.
You have a lot to learn, sir. And if I know the Klingons, you'll be learning it the hard way.
This is the ruling council?
I am Ayelborne, temporary head of the council. I bid you welcome.
No doubt you do. I am Kor, military governor of Organia. (looking at Kirk) Who are you?
He is Baroner, one of our leading citizens.
And he has no tongue?
I have a tongue.
Good. You will be taught how to use it. Where is your smile?
My what?
The stupid, idiotic smile everyone else seems to be wearing. A Vulcan. Do you also have a tongue?
I am Spock, a dealer in kevas and trillium.
He's no spy.
Well, have we a ram among the sheep? Do you object to us taking him?
He's done nothing. Nothing at all.
Coming from an Organian, yours is practically an act of rebellion. Very good. (to the Council) So you welcome me. (to Kirk) Do you also welcome me?
You're here. There's nothing I can do about it.
Good honest hatred. Very refreshing. However, it makes no difference whether you welcome me or not. I am here and will stay. You are now subjects of the Klingon Empire. You'll find there are many rules and regulations. They will be posted. Violation of the smallest of them will be punished by death.
We shall obey your regulations, Commander.
You disapprove, Baroner.
You need my approval?
I need your obedience. Nothing more. Will I have it?
You seem to be in command.
Yes. I am. I shall need a representative from among you. Liaison between the forces of the occupation and the civil population. Smile and smile. I don't trust men who smile too much. You, Baroner, you're the man.
Me? I don't want the job.
Have I asked whether or not you want it? We Klingons have a reputation for ruthlessness. You will find that it is deserved. Should one Klingon soldier be killed, a thousand Organians will die. I will have order. Is that clear?
Commander, I assure you our people want nothing but peace. We shall cause you no trouble.
I'm sure you will not. Take the Vulcan to the examination room. (to Kirk) You, come with me. I will familiarise you with your new duties.
And Mister Spock?
You are concerned?
He is my friend.
You have a poor choice of friends. He will be examined. If he is lying, he will die. If he is telling the truth, he will find that business has taken a turn for the worse. Take him. You do not like to be pushed. Very good. You may be a man I can deal with, Baroner. Come with me.
From this day on, no public assemblages of more than three people. All publications to be cleared through this office. Neighbourhood controls will be established, hostages selected. A somewhat lengthy list of crimes against the state.
You do not like them? (Spock is brought in.) Well?
He is what he claims to be, Commander, a Vulcanian merchant named Spock. His main concern seems to be how he would carry out his business under our occupation.
Nothing else?
The usual. A certain amount of apprehension regarding us. The mind is remarkably disciplined.
You are sure?
I used force four, which is sufficient to break down any pretence.
Very well, Lieutenant. Would you like to try our little truth finder?
I don't understand.
It's a mind-sifter or mind-ripper, depending on how much force is used. We can record every thought, every bit of knowledge in a man's mind. Of course, when that much force is used, the mind is emptied. Permanently, I'm afraid. What's left is more vegetable than human.
And you're proud of it.
It is a tool, a weapon. Somewhat drastic, but very efficient.
Are you sure you're all right?
Perfectly, Baroner. But it was an interesting experience.
All right, Vulcan, you may go. But you are an enemy alien. You will be under our scrutiny at all times. If I have to warn you
Not necessary, Commander. I understand you very well.
Return to your council, Baroner. You will receive our official notifications as soon as they are published. In the meantime keep the people in order. It is your responsibility.
Or I will be killed.
That is exactly right. You will be killed.
That mindsifter can't be all the terror they think it is.
It should not be underestimated, Captain. It reaches directly into the mind. We Vulcans have certain mental (a Klingon walks past) certain disciplines which enable me to maintain a shield. Without those disciplines, there would be no protection.
I'll try and avoid it.
I'm sorry, sir. We did not notice you.
Captain, I strongly suggest we direct our energies toward the immediate problem. Accomplishing our mission here.
You didn't really think I was going to beat his head in, did you?
I thought you might.
You're right. But as you say, we still have a job to do.
We'll receive no help from the Organians.
Maybe, but sooner or later they'll start resenting how the Klingons run things. If we could prove to them they could do something to strike back, to keep the Klingons off balance.
Verbal persuasion seems to be ineffective. Perhaps a more direct approach?
That's exactly what I had in mind. Mister Spock Did I or did I not see something that looked like a munitions dump outside of Kor's headquarters?
You did.
I think it's time we did a little simple and plain communicating. Tonight.
A very meritorious idea, Captain.
We're short of tools.
I'm certain the Klingons will provide whatever is necessary. It's a pleasure doing business with you, Mister Spock.
Okay so far. Sonic grenade?
With a delayed action fuse.
These crates contain chemical explosives. They should make a most satisfactory display.
Six, five, four three.
You were right, Mister Spock. A most satisfactory display.
Of course we blew it up. Deliberately.
But that was violence.
We did it to show you that you can fight back. You don't have to be sheep, you can be wolves.
Terrible to destroy.
History is full of examples of civil populations fighting back successfully against a military dictatorship. We may not be able to destroy the Klingons, but we can tie them up. Blow up their installations, disrupt their communications, make Organia useless to them.
Our fleet will eventually arrive. In the meantime, the battle is ours. It can be a successful one.
Captain, I implore you never to do such a thing again.
Why? Are you afraid of retribution? Does your personal freedom mean so little to you?
How little you understand us, Captain.
All I understand is that you apparently don't have the backbone to fight and protect your loved ones.
I speak of courage, gentlemen. Does courage mean so little to you?
You speak of courage. Obviously you do not know the difference between courage and foolhardiness. Always it is the brave ones who die. The soldiers. I hope you will continue to savour the sweetness of your life. You disgust me.
What are you going to do with him, Commander?
What is always done with spies and saboteurs. He will be killed, after he has had first-hand experience of our mind scanner.
There's no need to use your machine on him, commander. I can tell you his name. It is Captain James T. Kirk.
Ayelborne!
What? (A big grin spreads across his face) Captain of the USS Enterprise. A starship commander. And his first officer? I had hoped to meet you in battle, but
For some reason, he feels that he must destroy you, Commander, just as you feel you must destroy him.
That's going to be rather difficult now. Isn't it, Captain? What an admirable people. Do you always betray your friends?
I didn't want you to harm him. I'm sorry, Captain. It was for the best. No harm would come of it.
I'm used to the idea of dying, but I have no desire to die for the likes of you.
I don't blame you, Captain. Lock up the Vulcan. Take the Captain to my office. We'll have a talk before I do what must be done.
You'll have a drink with me, Captain?
No, thank you.
I assure you it isn't drugged. With our mind-scanner, we have no need for such crude methods.
What do you want from me?
Oh, a very great deal, but first I want to talk. Just talk.
You think I'm going to sit here and just talk with the enemy?
You'll talk. Either here, now, voluntarily, or under our mind-scanner. The fact is, Captain, I have a great admiration for your Starfleet. A remarkable instrument. and I must confess to a certain admiration for you. I know, of course, that it was you who destroyed our supplies last night.
Something was destroyed? Nothing inconsequential, I hope.
Hardly. They were quite important to us, but they can be replaced. You of the Federation, you are much like us.
We're nothing like you. We're a democratic body.
Come now. I'm not referring to minor ideological differences. I mean that we are similar as a species. Here we are on a planet of sheep. Two tigers, predators, hunters, killers, and it is precisely that which makes us great. And there is a universe to be taken.
It's a very large universe, Commander, full of people who don't like the Klingons.
Excellent. Then it shall be a matter of testing each other's wills. Of power. Survival must be earned, Captain. Tell me about the dispersal of your Starfleet.
I can get what I want through our mind-scanner, but there would be very little of your mind left, Captain. I have no desire to see you become a vegetable. This friend of yours, the Vulcan. He seems to have the ability to block our scanner. I think perhaps I will find out why. I will have him dissected. Your friend killed. You, a mental vegetable. Not a pleasant prospect, Captain, but it lies ahead for you unless you tell me everything I want to know. Twelve hours, Captain.
It will take a lot longer than that, Commander.
Longer than that I will not wait. I respect you, Captain, but this is war, a game we Klingons play to win. Take him to the cell with his friend. And watch him closely.
It's no use, Jim. There's no way out.
How much of the twelve hours do we have left?
Six hours, forty three minutes, if the Klingons are punctual.
I think we can count on them being punctual. Blowing that munitions dump wasn't enough. If we get out of here, we've got to carry the attack directly to Kor. These Organians
They do not seem to understand. Most peculiar.
Nevertheless, our orders still stand. We've got to make some attempt to neutralise the Klingon occupation.
We may not get the chance, Captain. These walls are very thick.
And there are guards every few feet down the hall.
Oh, there you are, gentlemen. I trust you are in good health? Shall we go?
Go?
Yes. Your captors plan to do violence to you. That we cannot permit. I came to take you away.
You turned us over to them. You expect us to trust you now?
Is there really a choice, Captain? I offer you safety.
We can't stay here. This is the first place they'll look.
They will not come here, Captain. You may believe me.
First you turn us in, then get us out. What are you doing now, waiting for the Klingons to post a reward so you can turn us in again and collect it?
How little you understand us, Captain.
Nor do we understand what happened to the guard at the citadel.
Please do not concern yourself about them.
What happened to them?
Why, nothing happened to them, Captain. Nothing at all.
Commander!
Don't you see I'm busy?
The two Federation prisoners. They're gone.
You mean they've escaped?
I swear. No one was at fault. The guards, ten of them were constantly on duty watching the cell. Then when they opened it to give them food, they simply weren't there, and there was no way out.
If you're lying to me.
I swear!
All right, Lieutenant. Implement Special Occupation Order Number Four. Immediately!
Sir!
Is that's all you can do, smile?
You are free, Captain.
I want to know how I'm free, and why.
Indeed, there are several questions I would like to ask as well.
This idiotic placidity of yours, your refusal to do anything to protect yourselves
We have already answered that question. To us, violence is unthinkable.
Attention. Attention all Organians. Attention. This is Commander Kor. The two Federation prisoners have escaped, obviously with outside aid.
They will be returned immediately. So that you will know we mean what we say, listen.
Those are Klingon phasers. Take the door. Get down, gentlemen.
In the courtyard of my headquarters,
Two hundred Organians have just been killed.
In two hours, two hundred more will die, and two hundred more after that until the two Federation spies are turned over to us. This is the order of Kor.
Did you hear them?
Yes, of course, Captain. But nothing has changed.
Well, Mister Spock. It seems it's up to you and me.
It would appear so, Captain.
The Federation has invested a great deal of money in our training. They're about due for a small return. We have two hours with which to do it in.
But only two. More Organians will die.
No. No more will die on account of us, Mister Spock. Where are those phasers?
I cannot tell you.
You've told us a great deal about how you hate violence. Unless you tell me where those phasers are, you're going to have more violence than you know what to do with.
You mean you would actually use force?
It's entirely up to you.
Ayelborne, this is of no matter. Perhaps you'd better let him have what he wants. He
Very well, but it will do you no good. They're in that cabinet.
Gentlemen, I have no great love for you, your planet, your culture. Despite that, Mister Spock and I are going to go out there and quite probably die, in an attempt to show you that there are some things worth dying for.
There are only two of you against an army. Don't you realise that what you intend to do will be hopeless?
Come on, Mister Spock, let's get out of here.
Brave men.
Yes, but so foolish.
Interesting, however.
Of course, we cannot allow it. To stop them is very bad.
It is necessary. They may harm one another.
Trefayne.
They will wait until darkness.
And then?
Terrible. Inconceivable. Savage.
We will wait.
Mister Spock, can we get those two guards? What would you say the odds on our getting out of here?
Difficult to be precise, Captain. I should say approximately 7,824.7 to 1.
Difficult to be precise? 7,824 to 1? 
7,824.7 to 1.
That's a pretty close approximation.
I endeavour to be accurate.
You do quite well. Set your phaser on stun. We're after the top dog, not the members of the pack.
Very good.
But if the situation calls for it, we kill, is that clear?
Clear, Captain.
I'll take the one on the left. Fire.
It has begun.
Very well.
It will be hard.
Prepare yourselves.
No results, Commander.
Nothing?
I cannot understand these people.
They know what death is, don't they?
They do not seem to be worried about anything.
Bad enough to be a military governor, but to govern a population of sheep! Very well, Lieutenant, round up two hundred more.
Yes, sir.
(going into his office) Fools! Will I have to kill them all?
If you don't tell me what I want to know, I'll kill you here and now. Is that clear?
Yes.
Is Kor's office down there?
Yes.
What about the hostages? Talk. Talk.
I am to gather two hundred more.
To be killed?
Mister Spock.
Well, what are the odds now?
Less than seven thousand to one, Captain. It's remarkable we've got this far.
Less than seven thousand to one. Well, getting better. Getting better.
Just stay where you are, Commander.
You have done well to get this far through my guards.
(taking his weapon) I believe you'll find that several of them are no longer in perfect operating condition.
So, you are here. You will be interested in knowing that a Federation fleet is on its way here at the moment. Our fleet is preparing to meet them.
Checkmate, Commander.
Shall we wait and see the results before you kill me?
I don't intend to kill you unless I have to.
Sentimentality, mercy. The emotions of peace. Your weakness, Captain Kirk. The Klingon Empire shall win. Think of it, as we sit here, in space above us the destiny of the galaxy will be decided for the next ten thousand years. Can I offer you a drink? We can toast the victory of the Klingon fleet.
You may be premature. There are many possibilities.
Today we conquer. If some day we are defeated, well, war has its fortunes good and bad. Do you know why we are so strong? Because we are a unit. Each of us is part of the greater whole, always under surveillance. Even a commander like myself, always under surveillance, Captain. If you will note.
Cover, Spock! Back!
Shoot! Shoot!
What is it, Spock?
Inexplicable, Captain. Extreme heat. Not only the weapons but the bodies as well.
We are terribly sorry to be forced to interfere, gentlemen, but we cannot permit you to harm yourselves.
What are you talking about?
We have put a stop to your violence.
You are stopping this? You?
All instruments of violence on this planet now radiate a temperature of three hundred and fifty degrees. They are inoperative.
My fleet!
The same conditions exist on both the star-fleets. There will be no battle.
Ridiculous!
I suggest you contact them. You too, Captain. Your ship is now within range of your communications device.
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Captain.
I can't explain it. We were just closing in on the Klingon fleet when
Every control on our ship became too hot to handle.
Our power's gone. Our phaser banks are dead.
Stand by, Sulu.
My fleet, it's helpless.
What have you done?
As I stand here, I also stand upon the home planet of the Klingon Empire, and the home planet of your Federation, Captain. I'm going to put a stop to this insane war.
You're what?
You're talking nonsense.
It is being done.
You can't just stop the fleet. What gives you the right?
You can't interfere. What happens in space is not your business.
Unless both sides agree to an immediate cessation of hostilities, all your armed forces, wherever they may be, will be immediately immobilised.
We have legitimate grievances against the Klingons. They've invaded our territory, killed our citizens. They're openly aggressive. They've boasted that they'll take over half the galaxy.
Why not? We're the stronger! You've tried to hem us in, cut off vital supplies, strangle our trade! You've been asking for war!
You're the ones who issued the ultimatum to withdraw from the disputed areas!
They are not disputed! They're clearly ours. And now you step in with some kind of trick.
It is no trick, Commander. We have simply put an end to your war. All your military forces, wherever they are, are now completely paralysed.
We find interference in other people's affairs most disgusting, but you gentlemen have given us no choice.
You should be the first to be on our side. Two hundred hostages killed.
No one has been killed, Captain.
No one has died here in uncounted thousands of years.
You are liars. You are meddling in things that are none of your business.
Even if you have some power that we don't understand, you have no right to dictate to our Federation
Or our Empire!
How to handle their interstellar relations! We have the right
To wage war, Captain? To kill millions of innocent people? To destroy life on a planetary scale? Is that what you're defending?
Well, no one wants war. But there are proper channels. People have a right to handle their own affairs. Eventually, we will have
Oh, eventually you will have peace, but only after millions of people have died. It is true that in the future, you and the Klingons will become fast friends. You will work together.
Never!
Your emotions are most discordant. We do not wish to seem inhospitable, but gentlemen, you must leave.
Yes, please leave us. The mere presence of beings like yourselves is intensely painful to us.
What do you mean, beings like yourselves?
Millions of years ago, Captain, we were humanoid like yourselves, but we have developed beyond the need of physical bodies. That of us which you see is mere appearance for your sake.
Captain, it's a trick. We can handle them. I have an army.
Fascinating. Pure energy. Pure thought. Totally incorporeal. Not life as we know it at all.
But what about this planet? The fields, the buildings, this citadel?
Conventionalisations, I should say. Useless to the Organians. Created so that visitors such as ourselves, could have conventional points of reference.
But is all of this possible?
We have seen it with our own eyes. I should say the Organians are as far above us on the evolutionary scale as we are above the amoeba.
Well, Commander, I guess that takes care of the war. Obviously, the Organians aren't going to let us fight.
A shame, Captain. It would have been glorious.
You've been most restrained since we left Organia.
I'm embarrassed. I was furious with the Organians for stopping a war I didn't want. We think of ourselves as the most powerful beings in the universe. It's unsettling to discover that we're wrong.
Captain, it took millions of years for the Organians to evolve into what they are. Even the gods did not spring into being overnight. You and I have no reason to be embarrassed. We did, after all, beat the odds.
Oh, no, no, no, Mister Spock, We didn't beat the odds. We didn't have a chance. The Organians raided the game.
The Alternative Factor
Well, Mister Spock?
Very typical, Captain. Iron-silicon base, oxygen-hydrogen atmosphere, largely arid, no discernible life. No surprises.
Photographic section, begin scanning. Tie in to visual section 988-TG, computer bank 22. Kirk out. About four more orbits ought to do it, Mister Lesley. That'll wrap it up. Lay in a course for Starbase 200.
Aye, aye, Captain.
Captain.
Mister Spock!
Incredible, Captain.
What was that?
What my instruments read is totally unbelievable, Captain. Twice, for a split second each time, everything within range of our instruments seemed on the verge of winking out.
I want facts, not poetry.
I have given you the facts, Captain. The entire magnetic field in this solar system simply blinked. The planet below, the mass of which we're measuring, attained zero gravity.
That's impossible. What you're describing
Is non-existence.
Standard General Alert signal from Starfleet Command, Captain.
All stations to immediate alert status. Stand by.
Captain, scanners now report a life object on the planet surface below.
You just did a complete life survey five minutes ago. How are you just picking it up now?
Inexplicable, Captain. This reading began at approximately the moment that the pulsation phenomenon began to subside.
Well, what is it, this object? Its physical makeup?
A living being. Body temperature 98.5 Fahrenheit. Mass, electrical impulses, movement. It is apparently human, Captain.
And its appearance coincided with this cosmic winking-out?
Explanation.
None.
Speculation. Could this being present any danger to the ship?
Possible. Very possible.
Lieutenant Uhura, notify Security to have an armed detachment of men ready to beam down with us. Let's go. Any word comes through from Starfleet Command, pipe it down immediately. Communications, priority one.
You came! Thank the heavens. There's still time. It's not too late. We can still stop him. But I, but I, need, need your help.
Nothing yet, sir.
(A woman in a blue uniform) Report on the dilithium crystals, Captain.
Yes.
Whatever that phenomenon was, it drained almost all of our crystals completely. It could mean trouble.
You have a talent for understatement, Lieutenant. Without full crystal power, our orbit will begin to decay in ten hours. Re-amplify immediately.
Aye aye, sir. 
Any further magnetic disturbance?
Negative, Captain. Scanners indicate situation normal.
Nothing?
Nothing. Illogical. An effect of such proportions, unexplainable by any established physical laws that I'm aware of. I have been able to ascertain one fact. Though the effect, whatever it was, was unquestioningly widespread, it was strongest here on the planet beneath us.
Keep checking.
Red Two message in one minute, Captain. Starfleet Command. Code Factor one, sir.
Repeat.
Code Factor one.
Invasion status. All hands, this is the Captain. Battle stations. I repeat, battle stations. This is no drill.
McCoy, Captain.
Kirk here.
About our patient.
Yes, Doctor, quickly.
He'll make it. He'll be stiff and sore for a while, but he'll be all right.
I'll talk to him later. Thank you. Kirk out.
Message ready, Captain. Main screen, coming up.
Kirk here. Enterprise standing by, Commodore.
You're aware of the effect an hour ago?
Yes, sir.
You may not be aware of its scope. It occurred in every quadrant of the galaxy and far beyond. Complete disruption of normal magnetic and gravimetric fields, timewarp distortion, possible radiation variations. And all of them centring on the general area which you are now patrolling. The question is, are these natural phenomena or are they mechanically created, and if they are, by whom? For what purpose? Your guess, Captain.
Thank you, sir. I have considered all the alternatives. My best guess is it could be a prelude to invasion.
Exactly our consensus. I'm giving you the job of finding out specifically.
Negative. I'm evacuating all Starfleet units and personnel within a hundred parsecs of your position. It's going to be tough on you and the Enterprise, but that's the job you've drawn. You're on your own.
I see. You mean, we're the bait.
Good luck.
Thank you, sir. (transmission ends) Maintain alert status at all battle stations.
Aye aye, sir.
From the top, Mister Spock. First, the phenomenon came from the planet below. Secondly, the danger is apparently real and imminent.
Third, a closer examination of the planet's surface would be in order. My job, sir?
Yes. Meanwhile, I'll talk to our unexpected guest. Maybe he can provide some answers.
That's how I came to be down there, Captain, pursuing the devil's own spawn, a thing I've chased across the universe. He's humanoid outside, but inside, he's a hideous, murdering monster. I'll get him, Captain. I swear it.
You say this one man
Not man! Thing.
Thing destroyed your entire civilisation.
To the last man, woman and child.
How did you escape?
I was inspecting magnetic communications satellites. You believe me, don't you?
Before we picked you up, our ship sustained a number of incredible effects.
That was he! He's death, anti-life, he lives to destroy.
Is he the thing that attacked you?
Yes. I give you my word. I swear it.
We don't have any other facts, any information.
Then you'll join me in my holy cause? Help me in visiting justice and vengeance upon him.
My only cause is the safety of my ship and the mission we're on. You'll beam down with me and I'll check your story out.
Spock, find anything?
Negative, Captain. Anything from our guest?
According to him, there's a creature of some sort down here, a humanoid.
Lieutenant Uhura communicated that information. I ordered re-confirmation on our sensors. They indicate no living creature on this planet. I suggest, Captain, that you've been lied to.
Captain, you yourself said there were no other explanations. Why do you give credence to this man?
I fail to comprehend your indignation, sir. I've simply made the logical deduction that you are a liar.
Let's have it. The truth this time.
No! You've come back in, is it? Well, don't stop. Here I am. Come at me again. We'll finish it!
Can you identify that?
I'm trying, Captain.
Lazarus! You stay here. All personnel, security red.
Come! Come! It'll do you no good. I'll chase you to the very fires of hell!
Lazarus, what happened?
I saw it again. The thing. It attacked me.
Let's get out of here.
Captain, readings of the effect indicate it centred here on this planet, almost on this very spot.
I told you it was a thing. All white, black and empty. A terrible emptiness.
Let's get back to the ship.
He'll kill us all if we don't kill him first! Kill! Kill! Kill! Kill! Kill!
Any luck?
Negative, Captain. I can no more explain the occurrence of the second phenomenon than I can the first.
If there's a shred of truth to what Lazarus said
That a single creature, a humanoid could be responsible for an effect of such magnitude?
Hard to believe.
Indeed.
But the rest of his story seems to fit. His wounds testify to an apparent confrontation with something.
Affirmative.
Assuming there is a humanoid, a something, how does he do it? He has no weapons, no power.
Captain, I only know for certain that the occurrence of the phenomenon coincides exactly with the moments that Lazarus has his alleged confrontations.
Doctor McCoy asking to see you in sickbay, Captain.
I don't know, Jim. Maybe I'm imagining things, and maybe I'm not. You tell me.
You tell me. That's why you brought me down here, isn't it.
Well, as you know, we both brought Lazarus in here and I treated a deep abrasion on his forehead, right?
Right.
Then I bandaged it, I stepped into this room for just a moment
Bones, I've got a lot of things to do. Get to the point.
Well, say he's got the constitution of a dinosaur, recuperative powers ditto. As we both know, I'm a bright young medic with a miraculous touch. Why then, when I returned, there wasn't a trace of that wound on his forehead. Not even a bruise. It was like he had never been injured.
Where is he?
I don't know, Jim. This is a big ship. I'm just a country doctor.
Hi.
Hi. Coffee?
Is that an order, Lieutenant?
I know what you mean. Re-amplification finished on the dilithium crystals?
Yes. Ready and waiting.
Lazarus, are you all right?
Yes. But impatient. Have you decided to help me yet?
Is something wrong?
No. I have a ship's physician with a strange sense of humour.
This is no joke, Jim. I know what I saw.
Bridge calling the captain.
Go.
Request you come to the Bridge, Captain.
Find something?
Something quite extraordinary.
On my way. Lazarus, you're with me. Bones, if I had time, I'd laugh.
Main screen on, Lieutenant.
Screen on, sir.
Source of radiation, Captain.
How is it the scanners didn't pick it up before?
Because it is not there.
Another riddle? First Doctor McCoy, then you?
What I mean, Captain, is that according to our usual scanning procedures, there is nothing there that could be causing that effect.
But it is there.
Affirmative. I confess I am somewhat at a loss for words. It may be described, though loosely and inaccurately, as a rip in our universe.
A what?
A kind of physical warp, Captain, in which none of our established physical laws apply with any regularity. However, with the dilithium crystals, I was able to localise it.
Yes! That's it! The dilithium crystals. With their power we could do it.
You refer to the humanoid?
Yes. We've got him, Captain, we've got him.
What do the crystals have to do with it? All they show us the point of radiation.
That's just it, that's the key. That's the way to trap him. That's the solution. Captain, I beg of you. I plead, I demand. Give me the crystals.
Out of the question. Those crystals are the very heart of the power of my ship.
You fool! There won't be any ship if we don't kill him. He'll destroy all of you.
How? Now you tell me how. All I've heard is double-talk, lies, threats, accusations that don't hold water. Now you tell me, how it presents a danger to my ship?
I warn you, Captain. You'll give me the crystals.
Don't threaten me, Lazarus.
No threat intended. Captain, I'll have my vengeance.
Lieutenant Masters, Captain's calling.
Masters here.
Lieutenant, can you prepare an experimentation chamber in ten minutes? All dilithium crystals, full power.
I'll check, sir.
Captain. The chamber will be ready in ten minutes, sir. My assistant and I will
Captain! Captain!
Lieutenant, what is it? What's wrong? Lieutenant?
Captain, Security reports Lazarus missing.
Fact. You said you needed the crystals. Fact. An hour after you said you must have them, they were missing. Fact. Two of my crewmen were attacked.
And fact, Captain. I didn't take the crystals. I'm not the one. Find my enemy, find the beast, and you'll find the crystals.
How'd this beast get aboard my ship?
He did. Isn't that enough?
No. He didn't transport up. A report would've been made.
I tell you we're dealing with a creature capable of destroying worlds.
Why does he need the crystals? For what reason?
For the same reason that I do. Listen to me. He's humanoid. Why, he he can pilot a spaceship. He can compute formulas to destroy races. He can steal an energy source for his vehicle so he can escape from me. Are you deaf as well as blind?
Sit down. The crystals certainly aren't here. There's an unexplained radiation source on the planet. Obviously some connection. We'll check it out. Organise a search party immediately. Mister Lazarus will beam down with us.
Thank you, Captain.
You may not have reason to thank me, depending on what we find.
What do you believe now, Captain?
I believe the missing crystals aren't in your ship. Mister Spock?
Unable to locate the source of radiation.
Why not? You had it spotted on the Enterprise.
It has simply disappeared, Captain.
I want every inch of this terrain checked. Look for footprints, movement, anything. Call out if you spot anything. Don't be afraid to use your weapons.
Captain, look out!
He's coming out of it now.
The thing, the thing.
It's all right. You're on board the Enterprise.
The rock, I
How's your head?
Aches.
You saved my life down there. I want to thank you.
Why shouldn't I?
I have some questions I want to ask you.
Not now, Jim.
It's necessary.
Go ahead. It's all right.
This is a computer report of the evidence you gave at your first screening. It calls you a liar, Lazarus. For one thing, there's no planet at the location you said you came from. There never has been. If you want help from us, you'd better start telling the truth.
You wouldn't believe me if I told you.
Try us.
All right. I distorted a fact in the interest of self-preservation, for my holy cause. I needed help, not censure. Freedom, not captivity for being a madman. I was afraid that's what you'd call me if I told you the truth.
I'll have the truth now.
My planet, my Earth, or what's left of it, is down there beneath us.
What are you saying?
My spaceship is more than just that. It's a time chamber, a time-ship, and I. I am a time traveller.
And this thing you search for is a time traveler, too?
Oh, yes. He's fled me across all the years, all the empty years to a dead future on a murdered planet he destroyed. Help me! Give me the tools I need to kill him! The crystals! Don't let him get away! Don't let him get away.
Lazarus, you're hurt. I know. I sympathise, but I've got four hundred and thirty other men to worry about. Now where are those crystals?
I told you, he's got them. He took them. The thing! The thing!
He's got to get some rest, Jim. And would you get that muscleman out of my Sickbay. (gestures at the security guard)
Dismissed.
He's in a lot of pain.
Sometimes pain can drive a man harder than pleasure. I'm sure you know that, Doctor.
Well, don't worry, he's not going anywhere. Not this time.
What have we got, Mister Spock? A magnetic effect which produces a winking-out phenomenon. A mysterious, unidentified source of radiation on the planet. Lazarus, a walking powder keg. Your rip in the universe. A so-called murdering humanoid.
True, Captain, but more significant to me is the fact that our ship's instruments are specifically designed to locate and identify any object in our universe, be it energy or matter.
But by using those instruments you were unable to identify the source of the radiation on the planet.
Correct. Which would seem to be impossible.
Are the instruments in order?
Perfect working condition.
Then what you say leads obviously to one alternative. The source of radiation is not from our universe.
Nor in our universe, Captain. It came from outside.
Outside? Yes, that would explain a lot. Another universe, perhaps in another dimension, occupying the same space at the same time.
The possible existence of a parallel universe has been scientifically conceded, Captain.
All right. What would happen if another universe, say a minus universe, came into contact with a positive universe such as ours?
Unquestionably a warp. A distortion of physical laws on an immense scale.
Which is what we've been experiencing. The point where they come into contact, couldn't that be described as a hole?
Indeed. I point out that a hole in the universe or in a simple container can either allow the contents to escape
Or what is outside to enter. The invasion that Commodore Barstow suspected.
There has been no evidence of a large-scale invasion.
But a small scale invasion, Mister Spock. What is your analysis of the mental state of Lazarus?
Difficult, Captain. One moment, paranoid, the next, calm, mild, rational. Almost as if he were two men.
Yes, two men. Different, but identical. And a hole in the universe. No, not a hole, A door.
Through which these two beings are somehow enabled to pass.
Take a look at Lazarus. One minute he's at the point of death, the next he's alive, well, strong as a bull.
The cut on his forehead. First he has it, then it's gone, then he has it again.
Which is physically impossible for one man.
Quite right. Unquestionably, there are two of him.
What's going on? This leaping from universe to universe. This wild talk about a murdering creature who destroys civilisations What's the purpose?
Jim, madness has no purpose or reason, but it may have a goal. He must be stopped, held. Destroyed if necessary.
I don't follow you.
Two parallel universes project this. One positive, the other negative. Or, more specifically, one matter, the other antimatter.
Do you know what you're saying? Matter and antimatter have a tendency to cancel each other out. violently.
Precisely. Under certain conditions, when two identical particles of matter and antimatter meet
Like Lazarus. Identical. Like both Lazarus', only one is matter and the other antimatter. If they meet.
Annihilation, Jim. Total, complete, absolute annihilation.
Of everything that exists, everywhere.
The energiser has shorted. Get out of here. Sound the alarm.
Come on. You, too, Lieutenant.
No, I've got to stay
We've got to get out of here. The whole thing might blow!
Engineering calling Bridge. Fire! Fire in the energising circuit.
Fire, Captain. Engineering. Situation critical.
All available personnel, on the double. Spock, with me.
Report.
Under control, sir, but it couldn't have started by itself.
Lazarus. A trick to get the crystals.
Sir, you shouldn't be in here.
Oh, I didn't know.
He's probably beaming down with the crystals right now. I'm going after him. You organise a security detail. Follow me as soon as you can.
Spock to Bridge.
I'll get you now. I have a threshold. Run, run. I'll get you now.
Energise.
It's done, it's done! Finished, finished. It's done. It's done. It's done, it's done.
Lazarus.
Done. No! Don't! Not you!
No!
Welcome, Captain. I wasn't expecting you.
No, him.
Yes, him. You understand.
Not completely. This is a parallel universe?
Of course.
Antimatter?
Here, yes.
And if identical particles meet
The end of everything. Civilisation, existence, all gone. I tried to stop him, Captain. That's why I took your dilithium crystals.
He has two more.
That's very bad, Captain. If he comes through at a time of his own choosing. But I think if we hurry and you will help me, he can yet still be stopped. There's little time left. He meant to come through. When you accidentally passed through, it drained his crystals. It'll take him about ten minutes to re-energise with the equipment aboard his ship. That should give us enough time.
Exactly what did I pass through?
That's hard to explain, Captain. I call it an alternative warp. It's sort of a negative magnetic corridor where the two parallel universes meet. It's sort of a safety valve. It keeps eternity from blowing up.
This corridor, is it what caused the magnetic effect, the winking out phenomenon?
Precisely, Captain, but not because of its existence. Because, because my foe entered. The corridor is like a prison, with explosives at the door. Open the door, and the explosives might go off. Stay inside
And the universe is safe.
Both universes, Captain. Yours and mine.
Surely Lazarus must realise what would happen if you should meet face to face outside the corridor.
Of course he knows, Captain, but he's mad. You heard him. He's lost his mind. When our people found a way to slip through the warp and prove another universe, an identical one, existed, it was too much for him. He could not live knowing that I lived. He became obsessed with the idea of destroying me. The fact that it meant his own destruction, and everything else, meant nothing to him.
So you're the terrible thing, the murdering monster. The creature.
Yes, Captain. Or he is. It depends on your point of view, doesn't it? It's ready, Captain. If we can force him into the corridor while I'm waiting for him, we can put an end to this. But if he comes through at a time of his own choosing and breaks into this universe to find me
I understand. What do you want me to do?
Find him. Force him through his threshold, while I'm waiting for him, into the corridor, and I'll hold him there.
You can't hold him forever.
Can't I, Captain? You destroy his ship.
If I destroy his ship, won't yours also be destroyed?
It will.
And your door will be closed.
Yes, and so will his.
You'll be trapped inside that corridor with him forever. At each other's throats throughout time.
Is it such a large price to pay for the safety of two universes?
I'm ready.
Send him to me. I'll be waiting.
Lazarus.
Stand back.
No! No! No, I'm not ready! I'm not ready!
Take these crystals to the Enterprise.
I must destroy that ship completely.
What of Lazarus?
And what of Lazarus?
Activate phaser banks.
Phaser banks activated.
Stand by to fire.
Phasers standing by, sir.
Fire phasers.
All right, Mister Lesley, let's get out of here. Ahead warp factor one.
Warp one, sir.
Everything's all right, Mister Spock, for us.
There is, of course, no escape for them, sir.
There is, of course, no escape. How would it be? Trapped forever with a raging madman at your throat until time itself came to a stop? For eternity. How would it be?
Captain, the universe is safe.
For you and me. But what of Lazarus? What of Lazarus?
The City on the Edge of Forever
Stay on top of it, Mister Sulu.
We're holding orbit, sir. The helm is sluggish.
Control circuits threatening to overload, Captain.
Understood, Engineer. Mister Spock? We can't avoid these areas of turbulence.
I believe we'll have them plotted in a few more orbits, Captain.
Sickbay. To the Bridge.
Switching to manual, Captain. Do we maintain this orbit?
Spock?
This is of great scientific importance, Captain. We're actually passing through ripples in time.
Maintain orbit. Open the channel to Starfleet Command. Precautionary measure, Lieutenant. Broadcast to Starfleet Command my past week's log entries, starting with the unusual readings we had on the instruments and how they led us here. Inform Starfleet Command that apparently something or someone down on this planet
(pointing to Sulu) Bones. Can effect changes in time, causing turbulent waves of space displacement.
Some heart flutter. Better risk a few drops of cordrazine.
Tricky stuff. Are you sure you want to risk
You were about to make a medical comment, Jim?
Who, me, Doctor?
(at the helm) We're guiding around most of the time ripples now.
Mister Spock?
All plotted but one, Captain. Coming up on it now. Seems to be fairly heavy displacement.
Bones! Get back to your positions.
The hypo, Captain.
It was set for cordrazine.
Empty.
Communications, emergency medical team.
(screams) Killers! Assassins! I won't let you! I'll kill you first! I won't let you! You won't get me! Murderers! Killers!
Security alert.
Continue alert, decks four through eleven. The medical department knows as little as we do. In dosages approaching this, there's some record of wild paranoia.
Confirmed by the library record tapes, Captain. Subjects failed to recognise acquaintances, became hysterically convinced that they were in mortal danger, and were seeking escape at any cost. Extremely dangerous to himself or to anyone else who might
Bridge, Security. Alert, alert!
Bridge here. Go ahead.
Security 054, sir. We just found the transport chief injured.
Captain, Doctor McCoy has beamed himself down to the planet.
And the transporter at that time, Captain, was focused on the centre of the time disturbance.
So whatever's down there, McCoy is in the heart of it. Set up a landing party. Let's go get him. Kirk out.
These ruins extend to the horizon. Begin recording.
Recording, sir.
And of considerable age. On the order of ten thousand centuries old.
Detail, fan out. What is this thing, Mister Spock? It seems to be pulsating with power of some kind. Analysis, please.
Unbelievable, Captain.
That's funny.
This single object is the source of all the time displacement.
Explain.
I can't. For this to do what it does is impossible by any science I understand. It is operating even now. Putting out waves and waves of time displacement, which we picked up millions of miles away.
Landing party to Enterprise. No sign of Doctor McCoy. Search progressing.
Incredible power. It can't be a machine as we understand mechanics.
Then what is it?
(The doughnut pulses bright in time with the words) A question. Since before your sun burned hot in space and before your race was born, I have awaited a question.
What are you?
I am the Guardian of Forever.
Are you machine or being?
I am both and neither. I am my own beginning, my own ending.
I see no reason for answers to be couched in riddles.
I answer as simply as your level of understanding makes possible.
A time portal, Captain. A gateway to other times and dimensions, if I'm correct.
As correct as possible for you. Your science knowledge is obviously primitive.
Really.
Annoyed, Spock?
Behold. A gateway to your own past, if you wish.
Killers! Killers! I won't let you get me! I'll kill you first! I won't let you get me! Assassins! Murderers! Killers!
Spock! If that is a doorway back through time, could we somehow take Bones back a day in time, then
Relive the accident. This time be certain that the hypo accident is avoided. Look at the speed with which the centuries are passing, Captain. To step through on precisely the day we wish
Guardian. Can you change the speed at which yesterday passes?
I was made to offer the past in this manner. I cannot change.
Strangely compelling, isn't it? To step through there and lose oneself in another world.
I am a fool. My tricorder is capable of recording even at this speed. I've missed taping centuries of living history which no man before has ever
Doctor McCoy!
Bones, no!
Where is he?
He has passed into what was.
Captain, I've lost contact with the ship. I was talking to them. Suddenly, it went dead. No static, just nothing.
Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty.
Nothing wrong with the communicator, sir.
Your vessel, your beginning, all that you knew is gone.
McCoy has somehow changed history.
You mean we're stranded down here?
With no past, no future.
Captain, I'm frightened.
Earth's not there. At least, not the Earth we know. We're totally alone.
I was recording images at the time McCoy left. A rather barbaric period in your American history. I believe I can approximate just when to jump. Perhaps within a month of the correct time. A week, if we're fortunate.
Make sure we arrive before McCoy got there. It's vital we stop him before he does whatever it was that changed all history. Guardian, if we are successful
Then you will be returned. It will be as though none of you had gone.
Captain, it seems impossible. Even if you were able to find the right date
Then even finding McCoy would be a miracle.
There is no alternative.
Scotty, when you think you've waited long enough. Each of you will have to try it. Even if you fail, at least you'll be alive in some past world somewhere.
Aye.
Seconds now, sir. Stand by.
Good luck, gentlemen.
Happiness at least, sir.
And now.
I've seen old photographs of this period. An economic upheaval had occurred.
It was called Depression, circa 1930. Quite barbaric.
We seem to be costumed a little out of step with the time.
I'm afraid I'm going to be difficult to explain in any case, Captain.
Well, Mister Spock, if we can't disguise you, we'll find some way of explaining you.
That should prove interesting.
Let's get out of here.
Fascinating.
Theft, Captain?
Well, we'll steal from the rich and give back to the poor later. I think I'm going to like this century. Simple, easier to manage. We're not going to have any difficulty explaining
Well?
You're a police officer. I recognise the traditional accoutrements.
You were saying you'll have no trouble explaining it.
My friend is obviously Chinese. I see you've noticed the ears. They're actually easy to explain.
Perhaps the unfortunate accident I had as a child.
The unfortunate accident he had as a child. He caught his head in a mechanical rice picker. But fortunately, there was an American missionary living close by who was actually a skilled plastic surgeon in civilian life.
All right, all right. Drop those bundles and put your hands on that wall there! Come on!
Oh, how careless of your wife to let you go out that way.
What? Where?
Oh, yes, it's quite untidy. Here, let me help you.
You were actually enjoying my predicament back there. At times, you seem quite human.
Captain, I hardly believe that insults are within your prerogative as my commanding officer.
Sorry.
Time we faced the unpleasant facts.
First, I believe we have about a week before McCoy arrives, but we can't be certain.
Arrives where? Honolulu, Boise, San Diego? Why not Outer Mongolia, for that matter?
There is a theory. There could be some logic to the belief that time is fluid, like a river, with currents, eddies, backwash.
And the same currents that swept McCoy to a certain time and place might sweep us there, too.
Unless that is true, Captain, we have no hope. Frustrating. Locked in here is the place and moment of his arrival, even the images of what he did. If only I could tie this tricorder in with the ship's computers for just a few moments.
Couldn't you build some form of computer aid here?
In this zinc-plated vacuum-tubed culture?
Yes, well, it would pose an extremely complex problem in logic, Mister Spock. Excuse me. I sometimes expect too much of you.
Who's there?
Excuse us, miss. We didn't mean to trespass. It's cold outside.
A lie is a poor way to say hello. It isn't that cold.
No. We were being chased by a policeman.
Why?
These clothes. We stole them. We didn't have any money.
Well, I could do with some help around here. Doing dishes, sweeping, general cleaning.
At what rate of payment? I need radio tubes and so forth. My hobby.
Fifteen cents an hour for ten hours a day. What are your names?
Mine is Jim Kirk. His is Spock.
I'm Edith Keeler. You can start by cleaning up down here.
Excuse me, Miss. Where are we?
You're in the 21st Street Mission.
Do you run this place?
Indeed I do, Mister Kirk.
Radio tubes and so on. I approve of hobbies, Mister Spock.
Good evening.
You'll be sorry.
Why?
You expect to eat for free or something? You got to listen to Goody Two-shoes.
Now, as I'm sure somebody out there has said, it's time to pay for the soup.
Not that she's a bad-looking broad, but if she really wanted to help out a fella in need
Shut up. Shut up. I want to hear what she has to say.
Yes, of course, Captain.
Now, let's start by getting one thing straight. I'm not a do-gooder. If you're a bum, if you can't break off of the booze or whatever it is that makes you a bad risk, then get out. Now I don't pretend to tell you how to find happiness and love when every day is just a struggle to survive, but I do insist that you do survive because the days and the years ahead are worth living for. One day soon man is going to be able to harness incredible energies, maybe even the atom. Energies that could ultimately hurl us to other worlds in some sort of spaceship. And the men that reach out into space will be able to find ways to feed the hungry millions of the world and to cure their diseases. They will be able to find a way to give each man hope and a common future, and those are the days worth living for. Our deserts will bloom. (She continues under the dialogue.)
Development of atomic power is years away, and space flight years after that.
Speculation. Gifted insight.
I find her most uncommon, Mister Spock.
Prepare for tomorrow. Get ready. Don't give up.
Mister Kirk. You are uncommon workmen. That basement looks like it's been scrubbed and polished.
Then we can report back for other work?
Yes. Seven o'clock in the morning. Do you have a flop for the night?
A what?
You really are new at this, aren't you? A flop is a place to sleep.
Oh.
There's a vacant room at the place where I live for two dollars a week. If you want to I'll take you there.
Thank you.
Good.
We have a flop.
We have a what, Captain?
A place to sleep.
One might have said so in the first place.
Captain, I must have some platinum. A small block would be sufficient, five or six pounds. By passing certain circuits through there to be used as a duodynetic field core...
Mister Spock, I've brought you some assorted vegetables, baloney in a hard roll for myself, and I've spent the other nine tenths of our combined salaries for the last three days on filling this order for you. Mister Spock, this bag does not contain platinum, silver or gold, nor is it likely to in the near future.
Captain, you're asking me to work with equipment which hardly very far ahead of stone knives and bearskins.
McCoy'll be along in a few days, perhaps sooner. There's no guarantee that these currents in time will bring us together. This has to work.
Captain. Captain, in three weeks at this rate, possibly a month, I might reach the first mnemonic memory circuits.
Your hat.
If you can leave immediately, I can get you five hours work at twenty two cents an hour. What? What on Earth is that?
I am endeavouring, ma'am, to construct a mnemonic memory circuit using stone knives and bearskins.
Captain. Tools for finely detailed work.
That toolbox was locked with a combination lock and you opened it like a real pro. Why did you do it?
I needed the fine tools for my radio work. They'd have been returned in the morning.
I'm sorry, I can't
If Mister Spock says that he needs the tools and that they'll be returned tomorrow morning, you can bet your reputation on that, Miss Keeler.
On one condition. Walk me home? I still have a few questions I'd like to ask about you two. Oh, and don't give me that questions about little old us? look. You know as well as I do how out of place you two are around here.
Interesting. Where would you estimate we belong, Miss Keeler?
You? At his side, as if you've always been there and always will. And you? You belong in another place. I don't know where or how. I'll figure it out eventually.
I'll finish with the furnace.
Captain. Even when he doesn't say it, he does.
Why does Spock call you Captain? Were you in the war together?
We served together.
And you don't want to talk about it? Why? Did you do something wrong? Are you afraid of something? Whatever it is, let me help.
Let me help. A hundred years or so from now, I believe, a famous novelist will write a classic using that theme. He'll recommend those three words even over I love you.
Centuries from now? Who is he? Where does he come from er, where will he come from?
Silly question. Want to hear a silly answer?
Yes.
A planet circling that far left star in Orion's belt. See?
How are the stone knives and bearskins?
I may have found our focal point in time.
I think you may also find you have a connection burning someplace.
Yes. I'm overloading those lines. I believe we'll have our answer on this screen, Captain.
Good.
And, Captain, you may find this a bit distressing.
Let's see what you have.
I've slowed down the recording we made from the time vortex.
February 23rd, 1936. Six years from now. (reading below the headline FDR confers with slum area 'angel') The President and Edith Keeler conferred for some time today
How bad?
Bad enough.
The President and Edith Keeler.
It would seem unlikely, Jim. A few moments ago, I read a 1930 newspaper article.
We know her future. Within six years from now, she'll become very important. Nationally famous.
Or Captain, Edith Keeler will die this year. I saw her obituary. Some sort of traffic accident.
You must be mistaken. They both can't be true.
Captain, Edith Keeler is the focal point in time we've been looking for, the point that both we and Doctor McCoy have been drawn to.
She has two possible futures then, and depending on whether she lives or dies, all of history will be changed. And McCoy
Is the random element.
In his condition, what does he do? Does he kill her?
Or perhaps he prevents her from being killed. We don't know which.
Get this thing fixed. We must find out before McCoy arrives.
Captain, suppose we discover that in order to set things straight again, Edith Keeler must die?
Assassins! Murderers! Murderers! Assassins! You! What planet is this? (he drops the bottle) No! Don't run! I won't kill you! It's they who do the killing! Don't run! I won't kill you!
Why? What is so funny about man reaching for the moon?
How do you know?
I just know, that's all. I feel it. And more, I think that one day they'll take all the money they spend now on war and death
And make them spend it on life?
Yes. You see the same things that I do. We speak the same language.
The very same.
No!
I'm glad you got away, too. Why do you think they want to kill us?
Look, fella, you take a sip too much of that old wood alky, and, and almost anything seems like it
Where? Where are we? Earth? The constellations seem right, but. Explain! Explain this trick.
I, I,
Biped. Small. Good cranial development. No doubt considerable human ancestry. Is that how you're able to fake all of this? Very good. Modern museum perfection. Right down to the cement beams. Very, very good. Oh, I'd give a lot to see the hospital. Probably needles and sutures. All the pain. They used to hand-cut and sew people like garments. Needles and sutures. Oh, the terrible pain!
How long before we get a full answer?
I'll need at least two more days before I dare make another attempt.
McCoy could have been in the city a week now for all we know, and whatever he does that affects her and changes history could happen tonight or tomorrow morning.
Captain, our last bit of information was obtained at the expense of thirty hours work in fused and burned circuits.
I must know whether she lives or dies, Spock. I must know what to do.
Oh, Miss. That coffee, it just smells wonderful.
You look terrible! You'd better sit down. Come on.
I can't. I got to keep moving. I can't let them find me.
There's a cot in the back room. They won't find you there. Come on.
This is how history went after McCoy changed it. Here, in the late 1930s. A growing pacifist movement whose influence delayed the United States' entry into the Second World War. While peace negotiations dragged on, Germany had time to complete its heavy-water experiments.
Germany. Fascism. Hitler. They won the Second World War.
Because all this lets them develop the A-bomb first. There's no mistake, Captain. Let me run it again. Edith Keeler. Founder of the peace movement.
But she was right. Peace was the way.
She was right, but at the wrong time. With the A-bomb, and with their V2 rockets to carry them, Germany captured the world.
No.
And all this because McCoy came back and somehow kept her from dying in a street accident as she was meant to. We must stop him, Jim.
How did she die? What day?
We can estimate general happenings from these images, but I can't trace down precise actions at exact moments, Captain. I'm sorry.
Spock, I believe I'm in love with Edith Keeler.
Jim, Edith Keeler must die.
Hey, now, come on. You're not ready to take on any tigers just yet. Lie down.
The most common question to ask would be, where am I? I don't think I'll ask it.
Why not?
The only possible answer would conclusively prove that I'm either unconscious or demented. This looks like old Earth around 1920 or 25.
Would you care to try for 30?
I am unconscious, or demented.
I have a friend that talks about Earth the same way that you do. Would you like to meet him?
I'm a surgeon, not a psychiatrist. I am Leonard McCoy, Senior Medical Officer aboard the USS Enterprise.
I don't mean to disbelieve you, but that's hardly a Navy uniform.
It's quite all right. It's quite all right dear, because I don't believe in you, either.
Get some rest.
Edith.
Are you following me, sir?
With ulterior motives. Does that please you?
I hope it means (she stumbles on the step and Kirk catches her, while Spock watches.) Oh! How stupid! I've been up and down those stairs a thousand times. I could have broken my neck.
Captain, I did not plan to eavesdrop.
No, of course you didn't.
I must point out that when she stumbled, she might have died right there, had you not caught her.
It's not yet time. McCoy isn't here.
We're not that sure of our facts. Who's to say when the exact time will come? Save her, do as your heart tells you to do, and millions will die who did not die before.
Come in.
Well, you look just fine, Doctor.
Thank you.
I thought you might like to see the evening paper.
No, not particularly. You know, I've convinced myself that this is all in a cordrazine hallucination, but I've decided you're not.
That's reassuring.
But if you're not, what are you?
A friend. When you showed up here, you looked like you could use one.
I don't doubt it. What about this place? Do you run it?
I try to.
Why?
It's necessary.
Well, it was for me, at least. You may have saved my life.
Lots of people drink from the wrong bottle sometimes.
Not as wrong as the bottle I drank from. Allow me to show my gratitude. Perhaps there's something I can do around here to thank you.
We can talk about that later. I have to go. My young man is taking me to a Clark Gable movie.
A who movie?
A Clark Gable. Don't you know?
Well, I know what a movie is, but.
That's very strange. You get some rest. I'll see you later.
If we hurry, maybe we can catch the Clark Gable movie at the Orpheum.
What?
You know, Doctor McCoy said the same thing.
McCoy! Leonard McCoy?
Yes. He's in the Mission. He's
Stay right here. Spock! Stay right there!
What is it?
McCoy! He's in
No, Jim!
Edith.
You deliberately stopped me, Jim. I could have saved her. Do you know what you just did?
He knows, Doctor. He knows.
What happened, sir? You only left a moment ago.
We were successful.
Time has resumed its shape. All is as it was before. Many such journeys are possible. Let me be your gateway.
Captain, the Enterprise is up there. They're asking if we want to beam up.
Let's get the hell out of here.
Operation: Annihilate!
Anything, Lieutenant?
No, sir. I've tried every major transmitting station on Deneva. None of them have acknowledged my contact signal.
Try GSK-783, sub-space frequency 3.
But sir, that's a call sign for a private transmitter.
I'm very well aware of that, Lieutenant. Try it.
Yes, sir.
Evaluation, Mister Spock.
As I speculated, Captain, the overall pattern of mass insanity destroying civilisations follows an almost straight line through this section of the galaxy. Over here the Beta Portilin system the ancient civilisations. Archaeologists have given us information indicating that they were the beginning. Two hundred years ago, Levinius Five was swept by mass insanity, then Theta Cygni Twelve. The last was Ingraham B, two years ago.
And next in line, Deneva. Bones, what's your theory about the cause of all this?
There's no medical or scientific cause for what happened on those planets. Jim.
But it follows a definite pattern, a systematic progression from planet to planet.
Captain, we're picking up a ship on our sensors, heading directly into the Denevan sun. He'll burn up.
Plot an interception course, Mister Sulu. Warp factor eight. Lieutenant Uhura, try to contact that ship.
Aye, aye, sir.
The ship is a one-man vessel of Denevan configuration, Captain. He does not seem to be out of control. His course is straight for the sun.
Scotty, tractor beams?
Out of range, sir.
Making contact, Captain.
Denevan ship, this is the USS Enterprise. Can you reverse your course? Acknowledge.
Captain, we'll get too close to the sun.
Keep closing. Denevan ship, reverse your course. Do you hear me? Reverse your course. Acknowledge.
Outer hull temperature now four hundred and eighty degrees and rising.
He's too close, Captain.
So are we. Hull temperature one thousand degrees and rising. The sun's gravimetric pull increasing.
He burned up, Captain.
Reverse course. One hundred and eighty degrees about.
Aye, sir.
All clear, Captain. Hull temperature falling, gravimetric pull approaching tolerance level.
Very well. Reduce to sub-warp speed. Take us to Deneva.
Aye, aye, sir.
That Denevan ship headed deliberately into the sun. Why?
There's one possibility. The mass insanity may have reached this planet, too.
Captain, I'm having difficulty on that transmitter call to Deneva.
Keep trying.
Yes, sir.
Jim, your brother Sam and his family, aren't they stationed on this planet?
Planet development is normal, Captain. Originally colonised as a freighting-line base in this area.
Aye, they make regular trips from here carrying supplies to the asteroid belt for the miners and bringing cargo out. I've made the run a couple of times myself as an engineering advisor.
No Federation contacts for over a year.
Captain. I've made contact with your private transmitter, sir.
Put it on audio.
Please hurry. Help us. I don't have much time. They'll know. Please! Please help us
Aurelan, this is Jim on the Enterprise. Repeat your message.
Contact broken, sir.
Re-establish.
Sorry, sir.
I'm not interested in your excuses, Lieutenant. Re-establish contact with that transmitter.
I'm afraid that's impossible at the moment, Captain. They stopped broadcasting immediately. They do not acknowledge my contact signal.
Keep trying to raise them.
Yes, sir.
Jim, did you know who that woman was?
Yes. You were right a while back. My brother Sam lives on Deneva. He's a research biologist. That woman sounded like his wife Aurelan.
Set your phasers on stun. We're going to beam directly into the capital city. Alert status. Mister Spock.
Lieutenant Uhura has had no further response to our signals. Sensors report the expected number of humans on the planet surface. However, they are strangely quiet. Very little activity.
I'll want a complete transcript of everything that happens down there, Yeoman.
Yes, sir.
Let's go. Energise.
There are almost a million inhabitants of Deneva. There's more than one hundred thousand in this city alone. Where is everyone?
They're here, Captain. In the buildings. Strangely quiescent.
My brother's lab is over there. They signalled us once. There should be someone there. Let's find out what's happening.
Captain, several people approaching.
Stand by to fire. Fire.
Did you hear what they said, Mister Spock?
Indeed. They seemed most concerned for our safety.
They tried to brain us with these clubs. Check them out, Bones.
Their attitude was inconsistent with their actions.
To say the least.
There's something wrong, Jim. Their nervous systems. Unconscious like this, there should be just routine autonomic activity, but I'm getting a very high reading, as though even in their unconscious state, they're being violently stimulated.
Fan out. Follow me. Security.
They're here! They're here! Please keep them away!
(bearhugging her) Aurelan.
They're here! They're here!
Bones. (McCoy sedates her) Aurelan, you're safe now.
Is this your brother, Jim?
Sam. It is my brother. Was my brother.
I'm sorry, Jim. The boy's unconscious, but he's still alive.
Peter?
I'd better get the boy and his mother back to the ship. I can't do much for them down here.
Get ready to beam up.
McCoy to Enterprise. Prepare to beam up party of four.
Captain, I understand how you must
Yes. Yes, Mister Spock. You heard my sister-in-law say something about they being here. Your guess.
Notice the ventilator, Captain. Apparently they were trying to keep something outside from getting in. Obviously they were not entirely successful.
It doesn't make sense. There are no harmful life forms reported. Our sensors didn't pick up anything that didn't belong here.
That is correct. I am at a loss to understand it.
Ready to beam up, Captain. I'd like you to be onboard when your sister-in-law regains consciousness.
Take charge of the landing party, Mister Spock. I want some answers to all this.
I won't be able to give you the exact cause until I get the plates back from the lab. They're both in extreme pain. I sedated them heavily. But your sister-in-law seems to have a high tolerance. The tranquilliser hasn't affected her much.
Can she talk?
Yes.
Aurelan? Aurelan, it's Jim.
Jim? Sam, he's
He's dead. But your son's still alive. You've got to help us.
You are here. It is you, Jim.
Yes, I'm here. You have to tell us what happened, Aurelan, to you and the others.
They came eight months ago.
Who?
Things. Horrible things! Visitors brought them in their vessel from a planet. Ingraham B.
What kind of things?
Not the ship's crew's fault. The things made them bring their ship here.
Aurelan, it's important that you tell us. What kind of things?
Not their fault.
When she answers questions, any questions, it's as if she's fighting to get the answers out. As though something is exerting pain to stop her.
They use it to control us. They're spreading, Jim. They need us to be their arms and legs. They're forcing us to build ships for them. Don't let them! Don't let them go any further!
I'll do everything I can, Jim, to save him.
Report. 
The streets are extraordinarily quiet, Captain. We've seen no other Denevans, and the ones we stunned earlier were gone when we came out.
You've seen some kind of creature? Any alien form?
None, sir. Just that noise we heard.
A peculiar buzzing sound. We were about to investigate it.
All right. Let's go find out what it is. Set your phasers on force three, to kill. We're looking for some kind of creature, and we already know it will kill.
Spock!
Form a ring. Fire!
Incredible. Not only should it have been destroyed by our phasers, it does not even register on my tricorder.
Captain, it doesn't even look real.
It is not life as we know or understand it. Yet t is obviously alive, it exists.
And it can bear up under full phaser power.
Captain, I suggest we risk taking it aboard.
It's too close in here. It may be a trap in here. Let's move out.
Spock! Spock! (He pulls it off) It's gone. Can you stand? Spock, are you all right?
Nurse. That's the second time he's come out of it. Either he's fighting us, or something inside of him is fighting us.
Doctor, the readings have never looked like that before, not even on Mister Spock.
Let's prepare to close. Nurse!
Doctor, that's not all you're going to do?
Miss Chapel.
Doctor, there is more of it in him, entwined all through his body.
Miss Chapel, if you cannot assist me as required, call another nurse in here. But do one or the other now.
How is he?
To be very frank, Jim, I don't know that I can do anything for Spock or your nephew. (hold up the jar) They're pieces of some form of living tissue. I removed one from Spock's spinal cord, the other from your sister-in-law's body. They're both the same. The boy's too weak to touch. Besides, removal of the tissue wouldn't stop the pain anyhow as far as I can tell.
Did you operate on Spock in time?
No. I just removed these for examination. His body's full of these tentacles, entwining and growing all about his nervous system.
My nephew?
The same. Evidently, when the creature attacks, it leaves a stinger much like a bee or wasp, leaving one of these in the victim's body. It takes over the victim very rapidly, and the entwining is far, far too involved for conventional surgery to remove.
Recommendations?
I'm sorry, Jim. The lab, the science departments, we're all stumped.
No! No! (he sits up)
Mister Spock.
(hoarsely) No, I won't.
Mister Spock.
Bridge, this is Sickbay. Tell Doctor McCoy Mister Spock just left here.
He's delirious and possibly dangerous.
All decks, security alert. Locate and restrain Mister Spock. He may be dangerous. Use phasers on stun if necessary.
I must take the ship.
Down! I must take it down.
Get him back to the Sickbay. Use security restraints.
The K3 indicator registers the level of pain. Watch as I turn it on. That's what he's been going through. I've never seen anything like it. No wonder the poor devils go mad.
Doctor McCoy. Captain.
Spock.
These restraints will no longer be necessary. Nor will your sedatives, Doctor. I'll be able to return to duty. I apologise for my weakness earlier when I tried to take control of the ship. I simply did not understand.
I am a Vulcan, Doctor. Pain is a thing of the mind. The mind can be controlled.
You're only half-Vulcan. What about the human half of you?
It is proving to be an inconvenience, but it is manageable. And the creature, with all of its thousands of parts, even now is pressuring me. (the pain indicator hits the top of the monitor) It wants this ship, but I am resisting.
Can he control it the way he says, Bones?
Who knows, Jim? I know the amount of pain the creature can inflict upon him, but whether he can control it hour to hour
I have my own will, Captain. Let me help.
I need you, Spock, but we can't take any chances. We'll keep you confined for a while longer. If you can maintain control, we'll see. My nephew. If he regains consciousness, will he go through that?
Yes.
Help them. I don't care what it takes or costs. You've got to help them.
Jim, aren't you forgetting something? There are over a million colonists on that planet down there, just as much your responsibility. They need your help, too.
I am a Vulcan. I am a Vulcan. There is no pain.
Mister Spock, I thought you were still confined to Sickbay.
I was.
Here, now. Where do you think you're going?
I have an errand on the planet's surface. You will beam me down to the same co-ordinates as before.
Not likely, Mister Spock.
That is an order, Mister Scott.
Aye, sir, and I'm sorry I have to disobey it. The Captain said no one was to transport down. Mister Spock.
Freeze right there, Mister Spock, or I'll put you to sleep for sure. This is Mister Scott in the transporter room. Get me the Captain.
Mister Spock, I gave you an order to stay in the Sickbay.
Until the pain was gone, Captain. It has been discontinued by me.
Scotty?
He said he was transporting down to the surface, sir. Your orders were that no one was to beam down unless you authorised it. And knowing Mister Spock's determination on some things, I thought I'd better hold him here until I got your orders.
One of the creatures will have to be captured and analysed, Captain. We did not have a clear opportunity to do so earlier when I was attacked. Since my nervous system is already affected, as you pointed out, Doctor, I don't believe they can do much more to me.
Jim, this is ridiculous. I don't want my patients running around. He should be in bed.
I am in complete control of myself, Doctor. The fact that I am here proves that I do not belong in bed.
Mister Spock, your logic, as usual, is inescapable. Beam him down. Stay in constant touch with us. Give him your phaser. He'll need that, too.
Thank you, Captain.
Energise.
Jim, that man is sick. Don't give me any damnable logic about him being the only man for the job.
I don't have to, Bones. We both know he is.
Come in, gentlemen. I believe you'll find this interesting. (McCoy scans Spock.) Doctor, your medical skill and curiosity are quite admirable, but I assure you I'm all right.
You may be controlling the pain, Mister Spock, but you're far from all right.
Unimportant at the moment, Doctor. Please observe. Interesting, gentlemen. A one-celled creature resembling, more than anything else, a huge, individual brain cell.
Yes. That would answer a lot of questions.
Do you understand what I'm suggesting, Captain?
I think so. This may be one cell in a larger organism. An incredibly huge organism, in fact.
And although it is not physically connected to the other cells, it is nevertheless part of the whole creature, guided by the whole, drawing its strength from the whole, which probably accounts for its unusual resistance to our phaser weapons.
Existing so differently from any living matter or energy as we know it, that it may have come here, planet by planet, from an entirely different galaxy.
From a place where our physical laws do not apply. We may therefore find it difficult to destroy, Captain.
But not impossible, Mister Spock. The Denevan that flew into the sun cried out that he was free, that he'd won. That's the angle to work on, gentlemen. I want an analysis of all this from Medical and Life Science departments within the hour.
Yes, sir.
I'm sorry, Captain. I've tried everything I can. Variant radiation, intense heat, even as great as nine thousand degrees.
Then you're wasting your time. There has to be something that'll kill the creature without destroying the human host.
Which happens to be my point. The thing won't die, even at temperatures and radiation which would burn Spock and your nephew to ashes.
I can't accept that, Bones. We've got fourteen science labs aboard this ship. The finest equipment and computers in the galaxy.
Captain, I understand your concern. Your affection for Spock, the fact that your nephew is the last survivor of your brother's family.
No, no, Bones. There's more than two lives at stake here. I cannot let it spread beyond this colony, even if it means destroying a million people down there.
Gentlemen.
I regret I see no other choice for you, Captain. We already know this thing has destroyed three civilisations. Perhaps more.
Gentlemen, I want it stopped, too, but not at the cost of destroying over a million people.
Including myself, Doctor, and Captain Kirk's young nephew. Understandably upsetting, but once it spreads past here, there are dozens of colonies beyond and billions of people.
If killing five people saves ten, it's a bargain. Is that your simple logic, Mister Spock?
I will accept neither of those alternatives, gentlemen. I cannot let this thing expand beyond this planet, nor do I intend to kill a million or more people to stop it. I want another answer. I'm putting you gentlemen on the hot seat with me. I want that third alternative.
Report.
I'm sorry, Jim. We've been over and over it, made every conceivable test.
I therefore request permission to beam down to the planet's surface. I also suggest that your nephew accompany me.
Request denied.
Captain, I do not make this request lightly. I do not know how much longer I can hold out against the pain. But I do know what the boy will go through should he regain consciousness.
Request denied. There must be another answer. Something in the sun killed that thing before the Denevan died. All right. All right. We've tried heat, radiation. What other qualities or properties does the sun have?
It exists physically. It occupies space. It has mass, therefore gravity. It converts matter to energy.
Jim, we've been through it and through it. Radiation, heat
But one other thing you haven't mentioned. It's bright. It radiates a blinding light if you're close enough.
Nothing lethal about light.
Not to us. But down on the surface, the creatures stayed in the shadows for the most part. Suppose they weren't simply hiding. Suppose they're sensitive to light. Light, like in a sun, close up.
A possibility.
You can't move Deneva closer to the sun, Jim.
No, but you can move the equivalent of the sun to Deneva. Mister Spock?
Yes. In essence, it can be done. A string of satellites around the planet with burning tri-magnesite and trevium.
Well, I can rig a test cubicle in the bio-lab, put our specimen in it. But I don't
Good. Let's get on it.
Your figures are, of course, accurate.
Of course. The light of the sun at the proximity where the Denevan declared himself free was one million candles per square inch. If this works, the satellites we orbit will produce light of such intensity that even someone in a closed, darkened area will be affected by it.
Ready, Doctor.
Put on your masks.
Completed.
It worked! We can do it. What's the matter, Jim? We can do it.
It worked in a lab. With the creature exposed to everything we can give it. But what about the people who are infected?
Well, I don't know. Maybe trial
Maybe. There's no time for maybes, Bones. We need to know now.
But I'd have to put a
Yes, we'd have to put someone who's infected under that light.
Do you have any idea of the risk?
We have to duplicate the conditions on the planet, and Spock
Captain, you'll need a host for the next step in the test to determine whether the creature can be driven from the body. I am the logical choice.
Do you know what one million candlelight per square inch can do to your optic nerves?
There's no other way, Bones. We have to duplicate the brilliance that existed at the moment the Denevan declared himself freed.
All right. I'll rig up a protective pair of goggles.
There'll be none on the planet's surface, Doctor.
I agree completely.
Unfortunately, you're both right. It's the only thing we can do. All right, Mister Spock.
Mister Spock's the best first officer in the fleet.
Proceed.
Completed.
Spock, are you all right?
The creature within me is gone. I am free of it and the pain.
And I'm also quite blind. An equitable trade, Doctor. Thank you.
Doctor, the results of the first tests on the creature's remains.
(reading) Oh, no.
What is it?
I threw the total spectrum of light at the creature. It wasn't necessary. I didn't stop to think that only one kind of light might've killed it.
Interesting. Just as dogs are sensitive to certain sounds which humans cannot hear, these creatures evidently are sensitive to light which we cannot see.
Are you telling me that Spock need not have been blinded?
I didn't need to throw the blinding white light at all, Jim. Spock, I
Doctor it was my selection as well. It is done.
Bones, take care of him.
Completing the seeding orbit, Captain. Two hundred and ten ultraviolet satellites now in position. Seventy two miles altitude, permanent orbit about the planet.
Good. Scanners?
Scanners ready, sir.
Ready, Captain.
Satellite control, this is the Captain. Energise all satellites.
Affirmative.
All satellites operative, Captain.
Captain, receiving messages from a ground station.
Report.
The things are dying, sir. It's working.
Sickbay.
McCoy here.
Tell Spock it worked.
Yes, Captain. He'll be happy to hear that.
Bones, it wasn't your fault.
Bones.
Bones.
Yeoman, record this for Starfleet Command.
Ready, sir.
The alien creatures on Deneva have been destroyed
Captain, look. Mister Spock.
Spock. You can see.
The blindness was temporary, Jim. There's something about his optical nerves which aren't the same as a human's.
An hereditary trait, Captain. The brightness of the Vulcan sun has caused the development of an inner eyelid, which acts as a shield against high-intensity light. Totally instinctive, Doctor. We tend to ignore it, as you ignore your own appendix.
Mister Spock. Regaining eyesight would be an emotional experience for most. You, I presume, felt nothing?
Quite the contrary, Captain. I had a very strong reaction. My first sight was the face of Doctor McCoy bending over me.
'Tis a pity your brief blindness did not increase your appreciation for beauty, Mister Spock.
If you gentlemen are finished, would you mind laying in a course for Starbase Ten, Mister Spock?
My pleasure, Captain.
Unusual eye arrangement. I might've known he'd turn up with something like that.
What's that, Doctor?
I said, please don't tell Spock I said he was the best first officer in the fleet.
Why, thank you, Doctor McCoy.
You've been so concerned about his Vulcan eyes, Doctor, you forgot about his Vulcan ears. Ahead warp factor one, Mister Sulu.
Warp factor one, sir.