Amok Time
Oh, Captain. Got a minute?
A minute.
It's Spock. Have you noticed anything strange about him?
No, nothing in particular. Why ?
Well, it's nothing I can pinpoint without an examination, but he's become increasingly restive. If he were not a Vulcan, I'd almost say nervous. And for another thing, he's avoiding food. I checked and he hasn't eaten at all in three days.
That just sounds like Mister Spock in one of his contemplative phases.
Miss Chapel.
(carrying a tray and sounding embarrassed) Doctor McCoy.
Captain.
Captain.
What's this?
Oh.
Oh! Vulcan plomeek soup, and I'll bet you made it too. You never give up hoping, do you?
Well, Mister Spock hasn't been eating, Doctor, and I, I just happened to notice.
It's all right. Carry on, Miss Chapel.
Bones, I'm a busy man.
Jim, when I suggested to Spock that it was time for his routine check-up, your logical, unemotional first officer turned to me and said, you will cease to pry into my personal matters, Doctor, or I shall certainly break your neck.
Spock said that?
What is this?
Poking and prying! If I want anything from you, I'll ask for it!
Captain, I should like to request a leave of absence on my home planet. On our present course you can divert to Vulcan with a loss of but two point eight light days.
Spock, what the devil is this all about?
I have made my request, Captain. All I require from you is that you answer it. Yes or no.
All right, Spock, let's have it.
It is undignified for a woman to play servant to a man who is not hers.
I'm more interested in your request for shore leave. In all the years
You have my request, Captain. Will you grant it or not?
In all the years that I've known you, you've never asked for a leave of any sort. In fact, you've refused them. Why now?
Captain, surely I have enough leave time accumulated.
Agreed, but that isn't the question, is it? If there's a problem of some sort, illness in the family
No. Nothing of that nature, Captain.
Then since we're headed for Altair Six, and since the shore facilities there are excellent
No! I must. I wish to take my leave on Vulcan.
Spock, I'm asking you. What's wrong?
I need rest. I'm asking you to accept that answer.
Bridge. Helm.
Yes, Captain?
Alter course to Vulcan. Increase speed to warp four.
Aye, sir.
Thank you, Captain.
I suppose most of us overlook the fact that even Vulcans aren't indestructible.
No. (looking at his shaking hand) We're not.
Captain, something's coming in on the Starfleet channel. Priority and urgent, sir.
Put it on audio over here, Lieutenant.
Message complete, sir. Switching over.
Lieutenant Uhura, acknowledge that message.
Aye, aye, sir.
Mister Chekov, compute course and speed necessary for compliance.
(a bit of a Russian accent) We'll have to head directly there at warp six, sir. Insufficient time to stop off at Vulcan.
Head directly for Altair Six. Sailor's luck, Mister Spock. Or, as one of Finagle's Laws puts it, 'Any home port the ship makes ill be somebody else's, not mine'. The new president of Altair Six wants to get himself launched a week early, so we have to be there a week early. Don't worry. I'll see that you get your leave as soon as we're finished.
I quite understand, Captain.
Bridge. Navigation.
Navigation. Chekov here.
Mister Chekov, how late will we arrive for the ceremonies if we increase speed to maximum and divert to Vulcan just long enough to drop off Mister Spock?
I don't understand, Captain.
How far behind schedule will diverting to Vulcan put us?
We're on course for Vulcan, Captain, as Mister Spock ordered.
Thank you, Mister Chekov. Kirk, out.
Mister Spock. Come with me, please.
Deck five. You've changed course for Vulcan, Mister Spock. Why?
Changed the course?
Do you deny it?
No. No, by no means, Captain. It is quite possible.
Then why'd you do it?
Captain, I accept on your word that I did it, but I do not know why, nor do I remember doing it. Captain, lock me away. I do not wish to be seen. I cannot. No Vulcan could explain further.
I'm trying to help you, Spock.
Ask me no further questions. I will not answer.
I order you to report to the Sickbay.
Sickbay?
Complete examination. McCoy's waiting.
Come in, Spock. I'm all ready for you.
My orders were to report to Sickbay, Doctor. I have done so. And now I'll go to my quarters.
My orders were to give you a thorough physical. In case you hadn't noticed, I have to answer to the same commanding officer that you do. Come on, Spock. Yield to the logic of the situation.
Examine me, for all the good it'll do either of us.
How do you figure it, Chekov? First we're going to Vulcan, then we're going to Altair, then we're headed to Vulcan again, and now we're headed back to Altair.
I think I'm going to get space sick.
Jim, you've got to get Spock to Vulcan.
Bones, I will, I will. As soon as this mission is
No! Now. Right away. If you don't get him to Vulcan within a week eight days at the outside, he'll die. He'll die, Jim.
Why must he die? Why within eight days? Explain.
I don't know.
You keep saying that. Are you a doctor, or aren't you?
There's a growing imbalance of body functions, as if in our bodies huge amounts of adrenalin were constantly being pumped into our bloodstreams. Now, I can't trace it down in my biocomps. Spock won't tell me what it is. But if it isn't stopped somehow, the physical and emotional pressures will simply kill him.
You say you're convinced he knows what it is?
He does, and he's as tightlipped about it as an Aldebaran Shellmouth. No use to ask him, Jim. He won't talk.
Come.
Stay. McCoy has given me his medical evaluation of your condition. He says you're going to die unless something is done. What? Is it something only your planet can do for you? Spock! You've been called the best first officer in the fleet. That's an enormous asset to me. If I have to lose that first officer, I want to know why.
It is a thing no out-worlder may know except those very few who have been involved. A Vulcan understands, but even we do not speak of it among ourselves. It is a deeply personal thing. Can you see that, Captain, and understand?
No, I do not understand. Explain. Consider that an order.
Captain, there are some things which transcend even the discipline of the service.
Would it help if I told you that I'll treat this as totally confidential?
It has to do with biology.
What?
Biology.
What kind of biology?
Vulcan biology.
You mean the biology of Vulcans? Biology as in reproduction? Well, there's no need to be embarrassed about it, Mister Spock. It happens to the birds and the bees.
The birds and the bees are not Vulcans, Captain. If they were, if any creature as proudly logical as us were to have their logic ripped from them as this time does to us. How do Vulcans choose their mates? Haven't you wondered?
I guess the rest of us assume that it's done quite logically.
No. No. It is not. We shield it with ritual and customs shrouded in antiquity. You humans have no conception. It strips our minds from us. It brings a madness which rips away our veneer of civilisation. It is the pon farr. The time of mating. There are precedents in nature, Captain. The giant eelbirds of Regulus Five, once each eleven years they must return to the caverns where they hatched. On your Earth, the salmon. They must return to that one stream where they were born, to spawn or die in trying.
But you're not a fish, Mister Spock. You're
No. Nor am I a man. I'm a Vulcan. I'd hoped I would be spared this, but the ancient drives are too strong. Eventually, they catch up with us, and we are driven by forces we cannot control to return home and take a wife. Or die.
I haven't heard a word you've said, and I'll get you to Vulcan somehow.
Lieutenant, get me Admiral Komack at Starfleet Command, Sector Nine. Pipe it down to McCoy's office.
Starfleet Command. Yes, sir.
Mister Sulu, you don't think
Maybe you ought to plot a course back for Vulcan, just in case.
Communication to Mister Spock. Lieutenant Uhura here. The captain asked me to
Let me alone. Let me alone!
Captain, you're making a most unusual request.
I'm aware of that, sir, but it's of the utmost importance. You must give me permission to divert to Vulcan.
But you refuse to explain why it is so important.
I can't, sir, but believe me, I wouldn't make such a request
Altair Six is no ordinary matter. That area is just putting itself together after a long interplanetary conflict. This inauguration will stabilise the entire Altair system. Our appearance there is a demonstration of friendship and strength which will cause ripples clear to the Klingon Empire.
Sir, the delay would be, at most, a day. I can hardly believe that
You will proceed to Altair Six as ordered. You have your orders. Starfleet out.
Well, that's that.
No, it's not. I know the Altair situation. We would be one of three starships. Very impressive, very diplomatic, but it's simply not that vital.
You can't go off to Vulcan against Starfleet orders. You'll be busted
I can't let Spock die, can I, Bones? And he will if we go to Altair. I owe him my life a dozen times over. Isn't that worth a career? He's my friend. Bridge. Navigation.
Bridge. Navigation.
Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Vulcan. Tell Engineering I want warp eight or better. Push her for all she'll take.
Course already plotted. Laying it in, sir.
I see. Very well. Carry on, Mister Chekov. Kirk, out.
Miss Chapel.
Yes, Mister Spock?
I had a most startling dream. You were trying to tell me something, but I couldn't hear you. It would be illogical for us to protest against our natures. Don't you think?
I don't understand.
Your face is wet.
I came to tell you that we are bound for Vulcan. We'll be there in just a few days.
Vulcan. Miss Chapel.
My name is Christine.
Yes, I know, Christine. Would you make me some of that plomeek soup?
Oh, I'd be very glad to do that, Mister Spock.
Bridge.
It is obvious that you have surmised my problem, Doctor. My compliments on your insight. Captain, there is a thing that happens to Vulcans at this time. Almost an insanity, which you would no doubt find distasteful.
Will I? You've been most patient with my kinds of madness.
Then would you beam down to the planet's surface and stand with me? There is a brief ceremony.
Is it permitted?
It is my right. By tradition, the male is accompanied by his closest friends.
Thank you, Mister Spock.
I also request McCoy accompany me.
I shall be honoured, sir.
Captain. We're standing by on Vulcan hailing frequencies, sir.
Open the channel, Lieutenant. Vulcan Space Central, this is the USS Enterprise requesting permission to assume standard orbit.
This is Spock.
Doctor, what's going on?
T'Pring, parted from me and never parted, never and always touching and touched. We meet at the appointed place.
She's lovely, Mister Spock. Who is she?
She is T'Pring. My wife.
This is the land of my family. It has been held by us for more than two thousand Earth years. This is our place of Koon-ut-kal-if-fee,
He called it Koon-ut what?
He described it to me as meaning marriage or challenge. In the distant past, Vulcans killed to win their mates.
And they still go mad at this time. Perhaps the price they pay for having no emotions the rest of the time.
It's lovely. I wish the breeze were cooler.
Yeah. Hot as Vulcan. Now I understand what that phrase means.
The atmosphere is thinner than Earth.
I wonder when his T'Pring arrives.
The marriage party approaches. I hear them.
Marriage party? You said T'Pring was your wife.
By our parents' arrangement. A ceremony while we were but seven years of age. Less than a marriage but more than a betrothal. One touches the other in order to feel each other's thoughts. In this way our minds were locked together, so that at the proper time, we would both be drawn to Koon-ut-kal-if-fee.
Bones, you know who that is? T'Pau. The only person to ever turn down a seat on the Federation Council.
T'Pau. Officiating at Spock's wedding?
He never mentioned that his family was this important.
They are not outworlders. They are my friends. I am permitted this.
This is Kirk.
Ma'am.
Leonard McCoy, ma'am.
With my life, T'Pau.
What is it? What happened?
(pointing at T'Pau's bodyguard) With him?
Spock?
We'll stay.
Ma'am, I don't understand. Are you trying to say that she rejected him? That she doesn't want him?
Think Spock can take him?
I doubt it. Not in his present condition.
No! I am to be the one. It was agreed.
Hear me. I have made the ancient claim. I claim the right. The woman is
I ask forgiveness.
T'Pau.
My friend does not understand.
He does not know. I will do what I must, T'Pau, but not with him! His blood does not burn. He is my friend!
I burn, T'Pau. My eyes are flame. My heart is flame. Thee has the power, T'Pau. In the name of my fathers, forbid. Forbid! T'Pau. I plead with thee! I beg!
What happens to Spock if I decline?
You can't do it, Jim.
I can't?
No. She said their laws and customs were not binding on you.
And you said Spock might not be able to handle him. If I can knock Spock out without really hurting him
In this climate? If the heat doesn't get you, the thin air will. You can't do it!
If I get into any trouble, I'll quit. And Spock wins, and honour is satisfied.
Jim, listen, if you
Bones. He's my first officer and my friend. I disregarded Starfleet orders to bring him here. Another thing, that's T'Pau of Vulcan. All of Vulcan in one package. How can I back out in front of her?
I accept the challenge.
What do you mean, if both survive?
Now wait a minute, ma'am. Who said anything about a fight to the death?
These men are friends. To force them to fight until one of them is killed
Spock! No!
Is this Vulcan chivalry? The air's too hot and thin for Kirk. He's not used to it.
(holding up a hypo) I can compensate for the atmosphere and the temperature with this. At least it'll give Kirk a fighting chance.
You're going to have to kill him, Jim.
Kill Spock? That's not what I came to Vulcan for, is it? What's that?
It's a tri-ox compound. It'll help you breathe. Now be careful!
Sound medical advice.
McCoy to Enterprise.
Enterprise. Lieutenant Uhura here.
Have the transporter room stand by to beam up the landing party. (ends communication) As strange as it may seem, Mister Spock, you're in command now. Any orders?
Yes. I'll follow you up in a few minutes. You will instruct Mister Chekov to plot a course for the nearest Starbase where I must surrender myself to the authorities. (the sound of a transporter off screen) T'Pring. Explain.
Why the challenge, and why you chose my captain as your champion.
I see no logic in preferring Stonn over me.
Logical. Flawlessly logical.
Stonn. She is yours. After a time, you may find that having is not so pleasing a thing after all as wanting. It is not logical, but it is often true. Spock here. Stand by to beam up. Live long, T'Pau, and prosper.
I shall do neither. I have killed my captain and my friend. Energize.
Doctor, I shall be resigning my commission immediately, of course.
Spock, I
So I would appreciate your making the final arrangements.
Spock, I
Doctor, please, let me finish. There can be no excuse for the crime of which I'm guilty. I intend to offer no defence. Furthermore, I shall order Mister Scott to take immediate command of this vessel.
Don't you think you better check with me first?
Captain! Jim!
I'm pleased to see you, Captain. You seem uninjured. I am at something of a loss to understand it, however.
Blame McCoy. That was no tri-ox compound he shot me with. He slipped in a neural paralyser. Knocked me out, simulated death.
Indeed.
Nurse, would you mind, please?
Spock, what happened down there? The girl? The wedding?
Ah, yes, the girl. Most interesting. It must have been the combat. When I thought I had killed the captain, I found I had lost all interest in T'Pring. The madness was gone.
Kirk here.
Captain Kirk. Message from Starfleet Command, top priority.
Relay it, Lieutenant.
Response to T'Pau's request for diversion of Enterprise to planet Vulcan
Hereby approved. Any reasonable delay granted. Komack, Admiral, Starfleet Command.
Well, a little late, but I'm glad they're seeing it our way. How about that T'Pau? They couldn't turn her down. Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Altair Six. Leave orbit when ready. Kirk out.
There's just one thing, Mister Spock. You can't tell me that when you first saw Jim alive that you weren't on the verge of giving us an emotional scene that would have brought the house down. .
Merely my quite logical relief that Starfleet had not lost a highly proficient captain.
Yes, Mister Spock. I understand.
Thank you, Captain.
Of course, Mister Spock, your reaction was quite logical.
Thank you, Doctor.
In a pig's eye!
Come on, Spock. Let's go mind the store.
Who Mourns For Adonais?
Here's the report on Pollux Five, Captain. This entire system has been almost the same. A strange lack of intelligent life on the planets. It bugs the percentages.
Bugs the? Well, carry out the standard procedures on Pollux Four.
Aye, sir.
Lieutenant, you look a bit tired this morning.
Well, I was up all night working on this report, sir.
Well in that case, there's nothing like a wee bit of coffee to get you back in shape. Join me, Carolyn?
All right, Scotty. Just let me give this to Mister Spock.
Bones, could you get that excited over a cup of coffee?
Even from here I can tell his pulse rate's up.
Gentlemen. Come along, my dear.
I'm not sure I like that, Jim.
Why, Bones? Scotty's a good man.
And he thinks he's the right man for her, but I'm not sure she thinks he's the right man. On the other hand, she's a woman. All woman. One day she'll find the right man and off she'll go, out of the service.
I like to think of it not so much losing an officer as gaining
Come along.
Actually, I'm losing an officer.
Entering standard orbit around Pollux Four, sir.
Cartographic Detail, stand by.
Standing by, sir.
Preliminary reports, Mister Spock.
Pollux Four. Class M type planet, oxygen and nitrogen atmosphere. Sensors indicate no life forms. Approximate age four billion years. Judged no reason for contact. In all respects, quite ordinary, Captain.
Cartographic Sections, implement standard orders.
All cartographic standards full automatic.
Captain?
What in the name of?
Analysis, Mister Spock.
Momentarily.
Am I seeing things?
Not unless I am, too. Captain, that thing's a giant hand.
What is it, Mister Spock? Is it a hand?
Negative, Captain. Not living tissue.
A trick, then? A projection?
Not a projection, sir. A field of energy.
Hard about.
Hard about. We can't seem to get away from it.
It's almost as if it means to grab us.
Reverse all engines.
All engines reverse.
We're dead still, Captain. Helm doesn't answer. We can't move.
Lieutenant, relay our position and circumstances to Starbase Twelve immediately.
Aye, aye, sir.
Mister Sulu try rocking the ship. Full impulse power forward and back.
Aye, aye, sir.
Damage report coming in, Captain. Situation under control. Minor damage, stations three, seven, and nineteen.
Sickbay reports five minor injuries, all being treated.
Thank you. Mister Sulu?
Applying thrust, sir. No results, Captain. We're stuck tight.
Mister Spock. Status.
The ship is almost completely encircled by the field. It resembles a conventional force field but on unusual wavelengths. Despite its appearance, that of a human appendage, it is definitely not living tissue. It is energy.
Thank you. Mister Sulu. Our forward tractor beams, adjust to repel.
Aye, aye, sir. Standing by.
Activate.
Ineffective, Captain. There doesn't seem to be anything to push against.
Captain, a most curious development on scanner five seven.
Let's all take a look at it, Mister Spock.
Screen on, Captain.
Activity on hailing channel three, sir.
The eons have passed and what has been written has come about. You are most welcome, my beloved children. Your places await you.
Response frequencies, Lieutenant.
Calculated. Channel open, sir.
You have left your plains and valleys and made this bold venture. So it was in the beginning. You have made me proud. Now you can rest.
This is Captain James T. Kirk, commanding the USS Enterprise. Please identify yourself.
We shall remember together. We shall drink the sacramental wine. There shall be the music of the pipes. The long wait has ended.
Are you responsible for stopping the ship?
Yes. I caused the wind to withdraw from your sails.
Give it back, then we'll talk.
It has been five thousand years. Have you learned no patience in that time?
I don't know who or what you are, but I must warn you we have the power to defend ourselves. If you value your safety, release this ship.
You have the same fire. How like your fathers you are. Agamemnon, Hector, Odysseus.
Never mind the history lesson. Release the ship!
You will obey me, lest I close my hand thus.
External pressure building up, Captain. Eight hundred GSC and climbing.
Compensate.
One thousand GSC and climbing. (The crew react to increasing air pressure) Becoming critical, Captain. We can't handle it.
All right! Whatever you're doing, turn it off! You win!
Pressure is gone, Captain. Space normal on hull.
hat was your first lesson. Remember it. Captain Kirk, I invite you and your officers to join me. But do not bring that one, the one with the pointed ears. He is much like Pan, and Pan always bored me. No sad faces. This is a time to rejoice, not to fear. You are returning home. Let your hearts prepare to sing.
Let's go, Bones. You in good voice?
Sure it's wise, Jim?
If we don't accept his invitation, we'll have a crushed eggshell where this ship used to be.
Verbose, isn't he?
Insulted, Spock?
Insults are effective only where emotion is present.
Good. We'll tackle him together. We already know the questions. You're the best man to find the answers.
Tricorders.
What am I doing down here, Doctor?
Well, you're the A and A officer, aren't you? Archaeology, anthropology, ancient civilisations.
Correct.
We're going to need help in all those areas.
Come on.
My children, long have I waited for this moment. The memories you bring of your lush and beautiful Earth, the green fields and blue skies, the simple shepherds and their flocks.
You know of Earth? You've been there?
Once I stretched out my hand, and Earth trembled. And I breathed upon it, and spring returned.
You mentioned Agamemnon, Hector, Odysseus. How do you know about them?
Search your most distant memories, those of the thousands of years past, and I am there. Your fathers knew me, and your father's fathers. I am Apollo.
And I am the tsar of all the Russias.
Mister Chekov.
I'm sorry, Captain. I never met a god before.
And you haven't yet. Readings, Doctor.
Simple humanoid, Captain.
Evidently not so simple.
Earth, mother of the most beautiful of women in the universe. That at least has not changed. I am pleased. Yes, my children. Zeus, Athena, Aphrodite, Artemis. A gallant band of travellers. We knew your Earth well, five thousand of your years ago.
All right. We're here at your invitation. Would you mind telling us what you want without all the Olympian generalities?
You will not leave this place.
Transporter room.
Your transportation device no longer functions.
Enterprise, come in.
I will not permit that device to work, either, Captain.
What is it you want?
You will worship me, as your fathers did before you.
If you want to play god and call yourself Apollo, that's your business, but you're no god to us, Mister.
I said you would worship me.
And you've got a lot to learn!
And so have you! Let the lesson begin! (Apollo grows as tall as his temple.) Welcome to Olympus, Captain Kirk.
Mister Spock, I can't contact the landing party. All frequencies are jammed.
Try to break through it, Lieutenant.
Aye, sir.
Transporter and communications?
Very efficient. Mister Sulu, rig all transmission circuits for maximum power generation. Compute for reversal of polarity of the field around the ship.
Working, sir.
Lieutenant Kyle, I want a complete sensor scan of the planet.
Aye sir.
Locate all the lifeforms. I want to know what's going on down there.
To coin a phrase, fascinating.
Analysis. Lieutenant Palamas, what do you know about Apollo?
Apollo, twin brother of Artemis, son of the god Zeus and Leto, a mortal. He was the god of light and purity. He was skilled in the bow and lyre.
And this thing? (the temple)
Obviously he has some knowledge of Earth. His classical references and the appearance of all this.
I think the appearance of this is for our benefit. Bones?
I can't say much till I check our these readings. He looks human, but of course that doesn't mean a thing.
Whatever he is, he seems to control a remarkable technology.
Power is what he controls. You can't do tricks like that without energy.
Fine, but what power, and where is it? Scout around with your tricorders. Find the source of that power. Bones.
Yes?
Bones, I wonder if five thousand years ago
You have a theory?
I have an idea. What if he is really Apollo?
What?
Captain.
I want from you that which is rightfully mine. Your loyalty, your tribute, and your worship.
May I ask what you offer in exchange for this worship?
Life in paradise. As simple and as pleasureful as it was those thousands of years ago on that beautiful planet so far away.
Apollo, we're willing to talk, but you'll find we don't bow to every creature who happens to have a bag of tricks.
Agamemnon was one such as you, and Hercules. Pride and arrogance. They defied me until they felt my wrath.
I would like to point out that we are quite capable of some wrath ourselves.
I have four hundred and thirty people on that ship up there.
No, you do not, Captain. They are mine. To save, to cherish, or to destroy at my will.
But why? What you've said so far makes no sense at all.
How like Aphrodite and Athena. The beauty, grace. And you seem wise for a woman. What is your name?
Lieutenant Palamas.
I mean your name.
Carolyn.
Carolyn. Yes. You are beautiful. You would do Aphrodite credit. I will tell you a thousand tales, stories of courage and love. You will know what it is to be a goddess.
Leave her alone.
You protest? You risk much.
And so do you.
Scotty. (picks up the twisted and melted weapon) Very impressive. How'd you do it?
I've grown weary of discussion and argument.
Captain, the phasers. All the working parts are fused.
None of your toys will function. Yes. You are a beauty. But like Artemis, the bow arm should be bare.
Oh, it's beautiful.
Yes. Come. (he takes her hand and leads her away)
She's not going with you.
He shall learn the discipline of the temple. So shall you all. Come.
It's all right, Captain. I'll go.
Without fear. She is fit indeed.
Bones, how is he?
Stunned but coming around. I'm not sure it's wise to let her go off like that.
He would have been rather difficult to stop.
You saw how capricious he is. Benevolent one minute, angry the next. One more wrong move from her and he could kill her.
Mister Chekov, I think you'd better continue your investigation.
Aye, aye, sir.
How do you feel, Scotty?
I am tingling all over. Did he take her with him?
It would seem so.
Captain, we've got to stop him. He wants her. The way he looks at her.
Mister Scott, I understand your concern over her, but she volunteered to go with him, hopefully to find out more about him. She's doing her job. I think it's about time you started doing yours. We've got to find out the source of his power. You've got a tricorder. Use it if you're able to.
I'm able, sir.
And one more thing. I want no more unauthorised action against Apollo or whatever he is. That's an order!
Aye, aye, sir.
Besides, you stiff-necked thistle head, you could have gotten yourself killed.
Aye.
Scotty doesn't believe in gods.
Apollo's no god. But he could have been taken for one, though, once. Say five thousand years ago, a highly sophisticated group of space travellers landed on Earth around the Mediterranean.
Yes. To the simple shepherds and tribesmen of early Greece, creatures like that would have been gods.
Especially if they had the power to alter their form at will and command great energy. In fact, they couldn't have been taken for anything else.
Ready to reverse polarity, Mister Sulu?
Computed and standing by to generate, sir.
Activate all units.
No good, Mister Spock. We didn't even faze it. We're still locked tight.
Cut power, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant, we must restore communications with the landing party.
I'm working, sir, but I can't do anything with this.
Oh?
I might be able to rig up a subspace bypass circuit.
Good. Do so. Sensor report, Mister Kyle.
I've located the landing party, but one of them seems separated from the other four.
And Apollo?
I've just picked up readings for our own people, sir.
Mister Spock, here's something. There seems to be a radiated energy pulsation coming from the planet. I don't know what it is, sir.
Origin?
I can't seem to pinpoint it.
I would suggest, Mister Sulu, if you cannot find out where the power source is, you should find out where it is not. A simple process of elimination.
The whole planet, sir? Yes, sir. The whole planet.
Oh, it's lovely.
I've known other women. Daphne, Cassandra, but none more beautiful than you. Are you frightened of me?
Frightened? No, I don't think so. Of course, a girl doesn't go walking with a
A god?
All right, a god every day. What happened to the others? Artemis, Hera?
They returned to the cosmos on the wings of the wind.
You mean they died?
No, not as you understand it. We're immortal, we gods. But the Earth changed. Your fathers changed. They turned away until we were only memories. A god cannot survive as a memory. We need love, admiration, worship, as you need food.
You really think you're a god?
In a real sense, we were gods. We had the power of life and death. We could have struck out from Olympus and destroyed. We have no wish to destroy, so we came home again. It was an empty place without worshippers, but we had no strength to leave, so we waited, all of us, through the long years.
But you said the others didn't die.
Even for a god, there's a point of no return. Hera was first. She stood in front of the temple and spread herself upon the wind, thinner and thinner, until only the wind remained. But I knew you would come. You striving, bickering, foolishly brave humans. I knew you would come to the stars one day. Of all the gods, I knew and I waited, waited for you to come and sit by my side.
I don't understand.
Even five thousand years ago, the gods took mortals to them to love, to care for, like Zeus took Leto, my mother. We were gods of passion, of love.
There is a repeated occurrence of registrations, a regular pulsating pattern of radiated energy.
Unquestionably, an immensely powerful field of energy is being generated around here somewhere. We're just having difficulty focusing on it.
Apollo has no difficulty focusing. He taps that energy, Mister Scott.
Sir, some creatures can generate and control energy with no harm to themselves. The electric eel on Earth, the giant dry worm of Antos Four, the fluffy
Not the whole encyclopaedia, Chekov.
The captain requires complete information.
Spock's contaminating this boy, Jim.
Are you suggesting that he, Apollo, taps a flow of energy and channels it through his body?
That would seem most likely, sir.
Mister Chekov, I think you've earned your pay for the week. But where is the source of that power?
Number one on our list of things to do.
Is that all you have to offer?
Yes, except my estimation for his physical condition. In spite of Apollo's bag of tricks, he comes up essentially normal with just a few variations. However, there's an extra organ in his chest that I can't even make a guess about.
Bones, is it possible
Jim.
Where's Lieutenant Palamas?
She is no longer of any concern to you.
You bloodthirsty Saracen, what have you done with her?
Scotty!
Not good. Severe shock.
All right, mister. You wanted worshippers? You've got enemies. You want us to bow down, you'll have to
You will learn discipline. You will learn
Chekov, give me a hand.
Take care of Scotty.
Are you all right, Captain?
Where's Apollo?
He disappeared again like the cat in that Russian story.
Don't you mean the English story, the Cheshire Cat?
Cheshire? No, sir. Minsk perhaps, but
All right, all right, all right.
Sir, there is something I noticed. Apollo looked very strange when he disappeared, tired or in pain. I don't know if it means anything.
Very good, Mister Chekov. That might very well mean something.
How do you feel?
I can't get my arm to move.
Some neural damage.
We've got to get out of here.
How?
Well, let's assume that five thousand years ago creatures like our friend Apollo did indeed visit Earth and form the basis of the Greek classic myths.
Makes sense.
Most mythology has its basis in fact. If I remember my ancient legends, the gods, after expending energy, required rest, even as we humans.
And Apollo's gone, after attacking you and Mister Scott. You think maybe he's off somewhere recharging his energy cells?
Something like that. Remember, he's keeping a force field on the ship and he's expending energy down here. You said he looked pained and tired when he disappeared. If we can wear him out, overwork him, that might do it.
The trouble with overworking him is that it can get us killed.
If we can provoke him so that he strikes one of us again, there's a chance that he'll be drained enough so the rest of us can jump him.
I still say it can get us killed.
Not all of us, Bones. When he comes back, it's a chance we'll have to take.
Progress report.
I'm connecting the bypass circuit now, sir. It should take another half hour.
Speed is essential, Lieutenant.
Mister Spock, I haven't done anything like this in years. If it isn't done just right, I could blow the entire communications system. It's very delicate work, sir.
I can think no one better equipped to handle it, Miss Uhura. Please proceed.
Yes, sir. Right away.
Progress, Mister Sulu?
Sectors one through twenty five charted and examined. No chance at all of power originating in those areas.
Continue the search.
Aye, sir. Fourteen B by twenty six index.
Mister Kyle.
Yes, sir.
We're unable to break completely loose from this force field, but we might be able to punch some holes through it.
What for, sir?
To shoot through. It might also relieve Lieutenant Uhura's communications problem. Take these equations to the nuclear electronics lab. I want them to work on the problem of negating the force field in selected areas. That might be done by generating a strong pinpoint charge of M-rays on some of these selected wave lengths and tying them in with the combined output of all our engines.
Right away, sir.
Come here! I know you're trying to escape me. It's useless. I know everything you do. I tried to be compassionate toward your kind.
You know nothing about our kind. You know only our remote ancestors who trembled before your tricks. Your tricks don't frighten us, neither do you. We've come a long way in five thousand years.
But you're of the same nature. I could sweep you out of existence with a wave of my hand and bring you back again. I can give life or death. What else does mankind demand of its gods?
Mankind has no need for gods. We find the one quite adequate.
We shall not debate, mortal. I offer you eternal rest and happiness according to the ancient ways. I ask little in return, but what I ask for I insist upon. Approach me. (the four men turn their backs on him) I said approach me!
We're busy. (quietly) Look after the girl.
You will gather laurel leaves, light the ancient fires, kill a deer, make your sacrifices to me. Apollo has spoken!
Go! Gather laurel leaves? You must be joking!
Ha ha ha ha.
Kill a deer. That's the funniest thing I ever heard.
Captain.
Lieutenant, get back.
You shall reap the rewards of your insolence!
We're tired of your phony fireworks!
Mortal, you have earned this!
No, don't!
Lieutenant!
A father doesn't destroy his children. You said you were gentle and understanding.
Lieutenant!
How can they worship you if you hurt them?
Lieutenant.
Apollo, please. (taking his hand) You know so much of love. Please don't hurt them. Please.
I shall be lenient with you, for her sake. You will make plans to bring the rest of your people down. Be sure your artisans bring tools. You will need homes.
And you will supply the herds of sheep, and the pipes we'll play, and the simple skins we'll wear for clothes.
You will dismantle your ship for the supplies you need, and I'll crush its empty hull. I have been too patient. I shall be patient no longer.
Captain, we've got to do something!
We were doing something until our brave lady stepped in and saved us.
Any more good ideas, Jim?
Yes, I have. One more. And it depends on the lieutenant's loyalty. If she fails us, we'd better get used to herding goats.
Fools. I offer them more than they could know. Not just a world, but all that makes it up. Man thinks he's progressed. They're wrong. He's merely forgotten those things which gave life meaning. You'll all be provided for, cared for, happy. There is an order of things in this universe. Your species has denied it. I come to restore it. And for you, because you have the sensitivity to understand, I offer you more than your wildest dreams have ever imagined. You'll become the mother of a new race of gods. You'll inspire the universe. All men will revere you almost as a god yourself. And I shall love you for time without end, worlds without end. You shall complete me, and I you.
Kirk to Enterprise, come in. Enterprise, come in. Kirk to Enterprise, come in. Kirk to
Carolyn. What's happened to her?
Scotty, I'll find out.
Perhaps if I assisted.
How old are you?
Twenty two, sir.
Then I'd better handle it. (goes over to a very satisfied looking woman) You all right?
Oh, yes, I'm all right. I have a message for you.
Come over there. Well?
He wants us to live in peace. He wants to provide for us. He'll give us everything we ever wanted, and he can do it, too.
All right, Lieutenant, you can come down from Mount Olympus now. You've got work to do.
I don't understand.
He thrives on love, worship, attention.
Yes?
We can't give him that worship, none of us can. Especially you.
What?
Spurn him. Reject him. You must. You're special to him.
Yes. I love him.
Lieutenant. All our lives, here and on the ship, depend on you.
No, not on me.
On you, Lieutenant! Reject him, and we have a chance to save ourselves. Accept him, and you condemn all of us to slavery, nothing less than slavery. We might never get help this far out. Or perhaps the thought of spending an eternity bending knee and tending sheep appeals to you.
Oh, but you don't understand. He's kind, and he wants the best for us. And he's so lonely. What you ask would break his heart. How can I?
Give me your hand. Your hand. (she does) Now feel that. Human flesh against human flesh. We're the same. We share the same history, the same heritage, the same lives. We're tied together beyond any untying. Man or woman, it makes no difference. We're human. We couldn't escape from each other even if we wanted to. That's how you do it, Lieutenant. By remembering who and what you are. A bit of flesh and blood afloat in a universe without end. The only thing that's truly yours is the rest of humanity. That's where our duty lies. Do you understand me?
Yes. Yes, I understand. He's calling me.
Lieutenant. You have your orders and your duty.
Yes, sir. My orders and my duty.
I think we can try it now, sir. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain.
Kirk here.
Spock here, Captain.
We've pinpointed a power source on the planet's surface which seems to have something to do with the force field.
Is there a structure of some sort near you?
There is indeed, Mister Spock.
The power emanates from there.
Very good. How are you doing on the force field?
We can negate sections of it, creating openings through which we can fire our phaser banks.
Well, that ought to do it. Have Sulu lock all phaser banks onto the structure. Fire on my order only. Cut it fine. We'll be standing nearby.
Captain. I would recommend a discreet distance.
I'd love to oblige you, Mister Spock, but we're not all together. Besides, we have Apollo to deal with.
If that structure is the source of his power, I want to know where he is when we attack it.
Kirk out.
Bones, do you think that mysterious organ in Apollo's chest could have something to do with the transmission of energy?
Well, it doesn't serve any other purpose I know of.
Captain, we've got to wait until Carolyn comes back before we fire on the temple. We don't know what would happen to her if he was suddenly attacked. She might get killed.
Yes, I know. I know. Scotty. We'll wait.
I must say, Apollo, the way you ape human behaviour is remarkable, but there are some other things I must know. Your evolutionary patterns and your social development.
My what?
I'm sure they're unique. I've never encountered a specimen like you before.
I am Apollo. I've chosen you.
I'm sure that's very flattering, but I must get on with my work now.
Your work?
I'm a scientist. My particular specialty is ancient civilisations, relics, and myths. Surely you know I've only been studying you.
I don't believe it. You love me.
Love you? Be logical. I'm not some simple shepherdess you can awe. Why, I could no more love you than I could love a new species of bacteria.
Carolyn! I forbid you to go. I order you to stay.
Is that the secret of your power over women, the thunderbolts you throw?
What the devil is that?
(answers communicator) Kirk here.
Spock, Captain.
Sensors are picking up an atmospheric disturbance in your area.
Stand by your phasers, Mister Spock. Prepare to fire on my signal. Kirk out.
Captain, we've got to go and find her!
We've got to be here when he comes back.
But what if he doesn't. What if he
Scotty, just hold on!
Captain!
All right. The temple is his power source. Let's bring him back to it. Get to cover. Mister Spock, fire those phasers.
Captain, you're too close.
Fire those phasers! That's an order, Mister Spock!
All phaser banks, fire!
No! Stop! Stop, I say!
All phaser banks, maintain firing rate!
More power to the shields.
Stop!
Scotty!
Stop, I say! (the temple is now yellow) I command it!
All banks maintain firing rate.
Maintaining, sir.
Stop! Stop! Stop!
I would have cherished you, cared for you. I would have loved you as a father loves his children. Did I ask so much?
We've out grown you. You asked for something we could no longer give.
Carolyn, I loved you. I would have made a goddess of you. I've shown you my open heart. See what you've done to me.
Zeus, Hermes, Hera, Aphrodite. You were right. Athena, you were right. The time has passed. There is no room for gods. Forgive me, my old friends. Take me. Take me.
I wish we hadn't had to do this.
So do I. They gave us so much. The Greek civilisation, much of our culture and philosophy came from a worship of those beings. In a way, they began the Golden Age. Would it have hurt us, I wonder, just to have gathered a few laurel leaves?
The Changeling
Any response from the Malurians, Lieutenant?
Nothing since their original distress call, sir.
What about the Federation science team working there? Doctor Manway had a special transmitter.
There's nothing, sir. I'm scanning all frequencies.
They have to answer.
Captain. They will not answer. The long-range sensor sweep of this system reveals no sign of life.
That can't be. The last census reported a total inhabitation of more than four billion people.
I register no life readings at all, sir.
That's impossible. What could have happened?
We would have known in advance of any system-wide catastrophe, and in the event of an interplanetary war, there would be considerable radioactive residue. Our instruments show only normal background radiation.
Any other possibilities?
Unknown, sir. Sensor readings would have revealed the presence of any disease organisms. They do not. In addition, we received the routine report from this system only a week ago. Even the Symbalene blood burn does not act that swiftly.
Captain, shields just snapped on. Something heading in at multiwarp speeds.
Evasive manoeuvres, Mister Sulu.
An extremely powerful bolt of energy, Captain.
Full power to the shields, Mister Scott.
Giving them all we got.
All hands, Red Alert. Phaser banks stand by. Photon torpedoes to Condition Red, Condition Red.
It's going to hit.
Shields still holding, sir.
Good.
Temporarily, Captain. Our shields absorbed energy equivalent to ninety of our photon torpedoes.
Ninety?
I may add, the energy used repulsing this first attack reduced our shielding power twenty percent.
First attack, sir?
I think we can expect others, Lieutenant.
We can resist three more such attacks. The fourth will shatter our shields completely.
Mister Spock, pinpoint the source. Mister Sulu, evasive manoeuvres.
Aye, sir.
Lieutenant, contact Starfleet Command. Patch in my log. Tell them what has happened. Tell them the entire Malurian race seems to have been destroyed by an unknown agency, and that we are under attack by an unidentified force.
Helmsmen, I said evasive manoeuvres.
We're losing power, sir.
Scotty?
I'm having to divert the warp engine power into the shields, sir, if you want the protection.
Mister Spock, speed of those bolts.
Approximately warp fifteen, Captain.
Then we can't out run them. Good, Scotty. You're doing the right thing. (another hit) Source, Spock.
Unknown, Captain. Nothing within sensor range. (a third bolt approaching) Something now, Captain. Very small. Bearing one two three degrees, mark one eight. Range ninety thousand kilometres.
That's our target, Mister Sulu. Prepare photon torpedo.
Shields still holding, sir, but the drain on the engines is reaching the critical point. Ach, we lost warp manoeuvreing power. Switching to impulse.
Photon torpedoes armed, sir.
Has the target changed location, Mister Spock?
No, sir. Holding steady.
Ready photon torpedo number two, Mister Sulu.
Ready, sir.
Fire.
Torpedo away. (a pause, then a flash) Direct hit.
No effect. Target absorbed full energy of our torpedo.
Absorbed it? There must be damage to your instruments, Spock .
They are in good working order, Captain.
But what could have absorbed that much energy and survived? Lieutenant, try to make contact.
Aye, sir.
Sir, they've fired another.
Can we take it, Mister Scott?
That's problematical, sir.
Captain, shields are down. We cannot survive another hit.
Anything, Lieutenant?
I'm trying, sir.
Translator computer. All hailing frequencies open.
Aye, sir. All hailing frequencies open.
To unidentified vessel. This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We are on a peaceful mission. We mean no harm to you or any lifeforms. Please communicate with us. Any further readings, Mister Spock?
Computing now, Captain. Weight, five hundred kilograms. Shape, roughly cylindrical. Length, a fraction over one metre.
Five hundred kilos and only one metre long?
What kind of intelligent creatures can exist in a thing that small?
Intelligence does not necessarily require bulk, Mister Scott.
Captain, we're getting a signal from the spacecraft.
Put it on audio, Lieutenant.
Yes, sir. It's impossible to get it any clearer, sir.
Analysis sector. Have them study and decode it.
Analysis sector, channel one, main computer. Decode.
Captain, this message is a sort of binary. Extremely sophisticated, compressed, carrying several channels at once.
Can you decode it?
No clue as yet, Captain. A moment. Transmission speed has stepped down. Much slower. Seems to be a single binary.
It's mathematical. Yes, one symbol. The symbol repeat. Sir, that isn't in the Starfleet code. It's an old-style interplanetary code.
Fascinating.
Repeat what? The message I sent?
It would seem so, Captain.
This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We are on a peaceful mission in this part of the galaxy. We have no hostile intentions. We request identity.
It's another signal now, sir.
It's a formula, Captain. They're sending us a mathematical message and requesting language equivalence. They're trying to communicate.
Tie in the ship's translator to the communication channel. Let them take it at their own speed.
Aye, Captain.
Cut power, Lieutenant. Overloaded and burned out.
I guess they can take it faster than we give it.
Captain, the message is coming in now.
USS Enterprise, this is Nomad. My mission is non-hostile.
Apparently they got what they needed before the computers burned out.
Nomad?
Require communication. Can you leave your ship?
It is impossible to come aboard your ship because of the size differential.
Non sequitur. Your facts are uncoordinated.
We are prepared to beam you aboard our ship.
That will be satisfactory.
Do you require any special conditions, any particular atmosphere or environment?
Negative. I will come aboard.
Good. Hold your position. We're locked onto your co-ordinates. We'll beam you aboard.
Captain, you're not really bringing that thing in here?
Do we have any choice, Scotty? Besides, once it's aboard, it won't be taking any more shots at us. Lieutenant, get a repair crew on that computer. Get Doctor McCoy down to the transporter room. Spock, you come with me. Scotty, you too.
Doctor McCoy to the transporter room. Maintenance crew C5.
They've got the co-ordinates, Jim. It's locked in.
Energise.
Energising.
Sensor readings, Mister Spock.
Negative, Captain. It has a protective screen. I cannot get through.
What do we do now, go up and knock?
Relate your point of origin.
We are from the United Federation of Planets.
Insufficient response. All things have a point of origin. I will scan your star charts.
If we show it a close-up view of our system, it has no point of reference. It won't know more than it does now.
A reasonable course.
If you care to leave your ship, we'll provide the necessary life support systems.
Non sequitur. Your facts are uncoordinated.
Jim, I don't think anybody's in there.
I contain no parasitical beings. I am Nomad.
It is reacting much like a highly sophisticated computer.
I am Nomad. What is opinion?
An opinion is a belief, a view, a judgment.
Insufficient response.
What's your source of power?
It has changed since the point of origin. There was much taken from the other. I am perpetual now. I am Nomad.
Wasn't there a probe called Nomad launched in the early 2000s?
Yes. It was reported destroyed. There were no more in the series. But if this is that probe
I will scan your star charts.
I will bring them.
I have the capability of movement within your ship.
This way.
Now, Scotty, get our warp power up to full capacity.
Aye, sir.
Spock, Bones, come with us.
Chart 14A, sir?
14A. (a diagram of our solar system comes up on a screen) Nomad, can you scan that?
Yes.
This is our point of origin, the star we know as Sol.
You are from the third planet?
Yes.
A planet with one large natural satellite?
Yes.
The planet is called Earth?
Yes.
You are the creator, the Kirk. The sterilisation procedure against your ship was unnecessary.
What sterilisation procedure?
You are the Kirk, the creator. You programmed my function.
Well, I'm not the Kirk. Tell me what your function is.
This is one of your units, creator?
Yes, he is.
It functions irrationally.
Sometimes, but tell him your function nevertheless.
My function is to probe for biological infestations, to destroy that which is not perfect. I am Nomad.
Biological infestation. There was never any probe sent out for that.
I believe the history computer can answer that question. I'll have the readout in a moment.
Did you destroy the Malurian system?
Not the system, creator Kirk. Only the unstable biological infestation. It is my function.
Unstable infestation? The population of four planets? What kind of function
Doctor. Why do you call me the creator?
Is the usage incorrect?
Well, I
The usage is correct. The creator was simply testing your memory banks.
There was much damage in the accident.
Mister Singh. Come here a moment. This unit will see to your needs.
Sir?
I'll be back in a moment. Gentlemen, come with me.
You're on to something, Spock. What is it?
I've correlated all the available information on the Nomad probe, and I'm convinced that this object is indeed that probe.
Ridiculous. Earth science couldn't begin to build anything with those capabilities that long ago.
True.
Nomad was destroyed.
Presumed destroyed by a meteor collision. I submit that it was badly damaged and somehow managed to repair itself.
I heard some lectures at the Academy on the Nomad probe. Its mission was essentially peaceful.
Did I disturb you? Did you wish anything?
Bridge to auxiliary control room. Check in, please.
Lieutenant Singh here.
All systems are normal except warp power indicators.
Anything else?
One moment, Lieutenant.
Holding. (singing while Singh checks some boards) Where my heart is, Where my heart is. Somewhere beyond the stars. Beyond Antares.
This is the creator of Nomad, perhaps the most brilliant though erratic scientist of his time. His dream was to build a perfect thinking machine, capable of independent logic. You recall his name.
Of course. Jackson Roykirk.
Jackson Roykirk. Captain James Kirk.
Yes. Similar. Captain, I believe that Nomad thinks you are Roykirk. That may well be why the attack was broken off. It responded to your name as well as its damaged memory banks permitted.
What do we have on Nomad itself, Spock?
(looking at the schematic on the monitor) That's not the same.
Essentially it is, Doctor. I believe that more happened to it than just damage in the meteor collision. It mentioned the other. The unanswered question is, the other what?
Its purpose was certainly altered. Its directive, to seek out and destroy biological infestations, could not have been programmed into it.
As I recall, it wasn't. It was supposed to be the first interstellar probe to seek new life-forms.
Precisely, Doctor. And somehow that programming has been changed. It would seem that Nomad is now seeking out perfect life-forms, perfection being measured by its own relentless logic.
If what you say is true, then we've taken aboard our vessel a device which sooner or later must destroy us. Security.
This is the captain. The mechanism we brought aboard is in the auxiliary control room. Have a security team meet me there in five minutes.
Captain, Mister Singh reports that Nomad is no longer in the auxiliary control room.
Security, cancel that order. Implement a full search for the mechanism. All decks report to me here.
Where my heart is, Where a scented miracle
(whispering) Bridge to Captain.
Captain here.
That mechanical beastie is up here.
On my way, Scotty.
Tomorrow the path along the way, There's where my love
What is the meaning?
What?
What form of communication?
I don't know what it. (realises) Oh, my singing. I was singing.
For what purpose is singing?
I don't know. I like to sing. I felt like music.
What is music? (a ray of light envelopes her head) Think about music.
Lieutenant! Keep away from that
Scotty!
Bones.
He's dead, Jim.
Why did you kill him?
The unit touched my screens.
That unit was my Chief Engineer. (silence) Lieutenant. Lieutenant, are you all right?
Sickbay. What did you do to her?
That unit is defective. Its thinking is chaotic. Absorbing it unsettled me.
That unit is a woman.
A mass of conflicting impulses.
Get Scott down below.
Will the creator effect repairs on the unit Scott?
He's dead.
Insufficient response.
His biological functions have ceased.
Does the creator wish me to repair the unit?
There's nothing I can do, Jim. If there's a chance, it'll have to be soon.
All right, Nomad. Repair the unit.
I require tapes on the structure.
Well, he'll need tapes on general anatomy, the central nervous system, and then one on the physiological structure of the brain. We'd better give it all the neurological studies we have, as well as tracings of Scotty's hyperencephalogram.
Nomad, I have arranged the tapes for flash feed at the top speed of the computer. Please do not draw the information faster than the machine's capacity.
Proceed. (a few moments later) Creator, the unit Scott is a primitive structure. Insufficient safeguards built in. Breakdown can occur from many causes. Self-maintenance systems of low reliability.
It serves me as it is, Nomad. Repair it.
Where is the unit Scott now?
The body is in Sickbay.
Show me Sickbay.
Doctor McCoy will show you.
Security. I want a twenty four hour, two man armed surveillance on Nomad. Pick it up in Sickbay.
No reaction, Doctor.
I could have told you that without looking.
What are the lot of you staring at me for?
It's unbelievable.
Fascinating.
How did I get here? How did I (sees Nomad)
It's all right.
That thing did something to Lieutenant Uhura!
Scotty, she's being taken care of. It's all right.
Take it easy. Lie down, Scotty. We just want to check you out.
The unit Scott is repaired. It will function correctly if your information to me was correct.
I'd like to check it out, if you don't mind. A man is not just a biological unit that you can patch together.
What did it do to me?
Doctor McCoy will explain it to you.
Well, Doctor?
Nurse, I want him prepared for a full physical examination.
Yes, sir.
Nomad, come here.
Repair that unit.
Not possible.
You restored Scott. He had much more extensive damage.
The unit Scott required simple structural repair. The knowledge banks of this unit have been wiped clean.
Captain, if that is correct, if there has been no brain damage but only knowledge erased, she could be re-educated.
Bones?
Yes. I'll get on it right away. Oh, and in spite of the way you repaired Scotty, you metal ticking
Does the creator wish Nomad to wait elsewhere?
Yes. Nomad, you will go with these units. (the two red-shirts) They will take you to a waiting area. Take it to the top security cell.
Doctor, I interrupted you because Nomad would not have understood your anger. It has great technical skill, but its reaction to emotion is unpredictable. It almost qualifies as a life-form.
That's a laugh.
The study of it would be of great use, Captain.
It's a killer, Spock. I intend to render it harmless. Get down to the Brig. Run a full analysis on the mechanism. I want to know what makes that thing tick.
What's the problem?
An almost human stubbornness, Captain. I have been unable to convince Nomad to lower its screens for analysis. Without its co-operation, I can do nothing.
Nomad, you will allow Mister Spock to probe your memory banks and structure.
Mister Spock is also one of your biological units, Creator?
Yes.
This unit is different. It is well-ordered.
Follow your instructions, Nomad.
My screens are down.
Thank you.
You may proceed.
See the dog. See the dog,
Sound it out.
R, r, run!
That's it, Uhura. That's very good. Now try the next one.
The dog has a, The dog, (something)
Not Swahili, Uhura. In English. The dog has a ball. See? B, ah, ll. Ball. Now you go ahead.
(Swahili, then) The dog has a ball.
That's right! Oh, that's right, Uhura. (they hug, then McCoy beckons Chapel over) Oh, here. You try another one. I'll be right back.
All right, Christine.
How's she doing?
Well, she's on the first grade reader. She's learning. Seems to have an aptitude for mathematics. Do you think we can re-educate her, Doctor?
Well, she checks out with no brain damage. We've got all the educational tapes in our library. Now it's up to us.
The ball is bl-u-ee. Bl-u-ey. Bluey?
It is not sufficient, Captain. I get certain references to the accident, the other, but nothing clear. There are areas I simply cannot scan.
We've got to know about it, Spock. what makes it operate, its compulsion for perfection.
Captain, I suggest the Vulcan mind probe.
Get into direct mental contact with that thing?
It seems the only way.
You saw what it did to Uhura.
There is a risk, but I have formed a partial hypothesis. I must check it out.
Nomad, the unit Spock will touch you. It is not an attack. It is a form of communication. You will permit it.
I will permit it, Creator.
I. Am. Nomad. I am performing my function. Deep emptiness, It approaches. Collision. Damage. Blackness. I. Am. The other. I am Tan Ru, Tan Ru. Nomad. Tan Ru. Error. Flaw. Imperfection. Must sterilise. Rebirth. We are complete. Much power. Gun ta. Noo. Icka. Tan Ru. The creator instructs. Search out. Identify. Sterilise imperfections. We are Nomad. We are Nomad. We are complete. We are instructed. Our purpose is clear. Sterilise imperfections. (he lets go of Nomad) Sterilise imperfections. Nomad. Sterilise. Sterilise. Nomad, sterilise,
Spock. Spock! Nomad! You're in contact with the unit Spock. Stop! Stop!
Acknowledged.
Spock. Spock?
Fascinating, Captain. The knowledge. The depth.
What does it mean, we are Nomad?
It was, it was damaged in deep space. Undoubtedly, the meteor collision. Its memory banks were destroyed, or most of them. It wandered without purpose, and then it met the other. The other was an alien probe of great power. Somehow they merged, repaired each other, became one.
Then it isn't Nomad?
Not the Nomad we lost from Earth. It took from the other a new directive to replace its own. The other was originally programmed to secure and sterilise soil samples from other planets, probably as a prelude to colonisation.
A changeling.
I beg your pardon?
An ancient Earth legend, Mister Spock. A changeling was a fairy child that was left in place of a human baby. The changeling assumed the identity of the human child. So, it is to sterilise, and for sterilise read kill.
Yes, it's powerful, it's sophisticated, but it's not infallible. It's space-happy. It thinks I'm its mother.
And that is the only thing that has saved us until now.
Notify the captain. What are you doing here? Watch your panels, everyone. Watch that polymass. Roger, help with the interfactor. Leave that alone.
This primitive matter-antimatter propulsion system is the main drive?
Aye.
Inefficiency exists in the antimatter input valve. I will effect repair.
How are you doing that?
The energy release controls are also most inefficient. I shall effect repair.
Warp eight, Mister Scott, and increasing.
Throw your dampers.
Warp nine.
Cut your circuits, all of them.
Warp 10, Mister Scott.
Impossible. It can't go that fast.
It just won't stop, Mister Scott. Warp eleven!
Nomad, stop what you're doing. Scotty?
Is there a problem, Creator? I have increased engine efficiency fifty seven percent.
You will destroy my ship. Its structure cannot stand the stress of that much power. Turn off your repair operation.
Acknowledged. It is reversed as ordered, Creator.
Mister Scott, give Sulu warp two and keep her there.
Aye, sir.
Captain. I've examined the brig. The forcefield door on the security cell is damaged and the guards have vanished. I must assume they are dead.
You killed two of my
Creator, your biological units are inefficient.
Nomad, it's about time I told you who and what you are! I'm a biological unit, and I created you.
(pause) Non sequitur. Biological units are inherently inferior. This is an inconsistency.
Nomad, there are two men waiting outside. You will not harm them. They will escort you back to the waiting area. You will stay there. You will do nothing.
I am programmed to investigate.
I have given you new programming and you will implement it.
There is much to be considered before I return to launch point. I must re-evaluate.
Reevaluate?
I suspect it is about to re-evaluate its creator. Captain, it may have been unwise to admit to Nomad that you are a biological unit. In Nomad's eyes, you must now undoubtedly appear imperfect.
It was a foolish mistake.
Even worse. Nomad just now made a reference to its launch point, Earth.
Spock, do you think it's possible that it got a fix on Earth when it tapped the computers earlier?
I do not believe there is much beyond Nomad's capabilities.
And we've shown it the way home. And when it gets there
It will find the Earth infested with imperfect biological units.
And it will carry out its prime directive. Sterilise.
Hey. Nomad, stop. Nomad, this way.
Captain Kirk to Sickbay. Emergency.
Manual controls.
No response.
Is she all right?
I think so. Looks like some kind of shock.
What happened?
Nomad examined the personnel files and the medical histories. She tried to stop him.
Whose history?
Yours.
Since it specifically examined your history, I suggest it has completed its re-evaluation.
And found that its creator is as imperfect as all the other biological units.
Bridge to Captain.
Kirk here.
Life support systems are out all over the ship.
Manual override has been blocked. Source, Engineering.
Nomad.
Undoubtedly.
Jim, with all the systems out we'll only have enough air and heat for
Get Scotty, some antigravs and meet me in Engineering.
Nomad? Stop what you're doing and effect repairs on the life-support systems.
Stop.
You're programmed to obey the orders of your creator.
I am programmed to destroy those life-forms which are imperfect. These alterations will do so without destroying the vessel which surrounds them. It, too, is imperfect, but can be adjusted.
Nomad, I admit that biological units are imperfect, but a biological unit created you.
I am perfect. I am Nomad.
No, you're not Nomad. You're an alien machine. Your programming tapes have been altered.
You are in error. You are a biological unit. You are imperfect.
But I am your creator.
You are the Creator.
I created you?
You are the Creator.
But I admit I'm imperfect. How could I have created such a perfect thing as you?
Answer unknown. I shall analyse.
Analysis complete. Insufficient data to resolve problem, but my programming is whole. My purpose remains. I am Nomad. I am perfect. That which is imperfect must be sterilised.
Then you will continue to destroy that which thinks and lives and is imperfect?
I shall continue. I shall return to launch point Earth. I shall sterilise.
You must sterilise in case of error?
Error is inconsistent with my prime functions. Sterilisation is correction.
Everything that is in error must be sterilised.
There are no exceptions.
Nomad, I made an error in creating you.
The creation of perfection is no error.
I did not create perfection. I created error.
Your data is faulty. I am Nomad. I am perfect.
I am the Kirk, the creator?
You are the Creator.
You are wrong! Jackson Roykirk, your creator, is dead. You have mistaken me for him. You are in error. You did not discover your mistake. You have made two errors. You are flawed and imperfect and you have not corrected by sterilisation. You have made three errors.
Error. Error. Error. Examine.
You are flawed and imperfect! Execute your prime function!
I shall analyse error. Analyse error,
Now. Get those antigravs on it.
Examine error. Error.
We've got to get rid of it while it's trying to think.
Your logic was impeccable, Captain. We are in grave danger.
Scotty, the transporter room.
Analyse error.
Error.
Scotty, set the controls for deep space. Two ten, mark one.
Aye, sir.
Faulty!
Faulty!
Nomad, you are imperfect!
Error. Error.
Exercise your prime function.
Faulty! Faulty! Must sterilise. Sterilise,
Now!
Energising.
My congratulations, Captain. A dazzling display of logic.
You didn't think I had it in me, did you Spock?
No, sir.
I thought you might like to know that Lieutenant Uhura is back to college level. She'll be back on the job within a week.
Good, Bones, good.
Remarkable.
What?
The destruction of Nomad was a great waste, Captain. It was a remarkable instrument.
Which might well have destroyed more billions of lives. It's well gone. Besides, what are you feeling so badly about? It's not easy to lose a bright and promising son.
Sir?
Well, it thought I was its mother, didn't it? Do you think I'm completely without feelings, Mister Spock? You saw what it did for Scotty. What a doctor it would've made. My son, the doctor. Kind of gets you right there, doesn't it?
Mirror, Mirror
We believe what you say, Captain Kirk, but our position has not altered. The Halkan Council cannot permit your Federation to mine dilithium crystals on our planet.
We have shown the council historical proof that our missions are peaceful.
We accept that your Federation is benevolent at present, but the future is always in question. Our dilithium crystals represent awesome power. Wrongful use of that power, even to the extent of the taking of one life, would violate our history of total peace. To prevent that, we would die, Captain. As a race, if necessary.
I admire your ethics and hope to prove ours. Kirk to Enterprise.
Spock here.
Report on magnetic storm, Mister Spock.
Standard ion type, Captain, but quite violent (Enterprise shakes) and unpredictable.
Rough ride?
If we stay.
Stand by to beam up landing party.
Plot an extended orbit to clear disturbance. Kirk out.
Comply, Mister Sulu.
Aye, sir.
When may we resume discussion?
The council will meditate further, but do not be hopeful of any change. Captain, you do have the might to force the crystals from us, of course.
But we won't. Consider that. Enterprise. Transporter room, energise.
Trouble, sir.
Spock was right. It was a rough trip.
At norm, Mister Kyle. Controls at neutral.
Yes, sir.
Status of mission, Captain?
No change.
Standard procedure, Captain? (Kirk nods) Mister Sulu, you will programme phaser barrage on Halkan cities.
Yes, Mister Spock.
Their military capability, Captain?
None.
Regrettable that this society has chosen suicide. Mister Kyle, you were instructed to compensate during the ion storm.
But I tried, Mister Spock, I tried.
Carelessness with the equipment cannot be tolerated.
But Mister Spock, I
Your agoniser.
No, Mister Spock.
Your agoniser, please.
No, Mister Spock! I tried. I really tried.
Mister Scott, the storm has caused some minor damage in your section. There are also injuries requiring your attention, Doctor. Well, gentlemen?
Mister Spock.
Yes.
The power beam jumped for a moment, sir, as the landing party was about to materialise. I never saw it happen before.
Due to your error, Mister Kyle?
No, Mister Spock. Before.
Possibly a result of the severe storm. Captain, do you feel any abnormal effects?
Yes. Doctor McCoy, you'd better look us over. That was a rough beam-up.
Yes, sir.
Mister Spock, have those transporter circuits checked.
Captain, what is all this?
How did we get in these
Not now. Not now.
What is this? Everything's all messed up and changed around, out of place.
Captain, what's happened?
No, not everything. That spot, I spilt acid there a year ago. Jim, What in blazes is this?
I don't know. It's our Enterprise but it isn't. Maybe
Maybe what, Captain?
Any of you feel dizzy when we were in the transporter beam?
Yes.
Aye.
When we first materialised.
I did.
It happened twice. First we were in our own transporter chamber, then we faded, and then when we finally materialised, we were here. Wherever this is.
Captain, the transporter chief mentioned a surge of power. The transporter lock might have been affected by the ion storm and we just materialised somewhere else.
Yes, here. Not our universe, not our ship. Something parallel. A parallel universe co-existing with ours on another dimensional plane. Everything's duplicated, almost. Another Enterprise. Spock with a beard.
Another Captain Kirk, another Doctor McCoy, another
An exchange. If we're here
Then our counterparts must have been transporting up at the exact same time. Similar storms on both universes disrupted the circuits. We're here, and they're on our Enterprise. Probably asking the same questions. Are we in another universe, and if so, how do we get back to our own? They'll use the computer, and we have to.
What about the Halkans? We can't let them be destroyed.
Scotty, can you buy me some time. Get below and short out the main phaser couplings. They'll think the storm blew the stand-by circuits.
Aye, sir.
Then get on this technology. It's all we have to work with if we want to get back home. The intercom may be monitored. Use your communicators for private messages. Subfrequency and scramble.
Aye, sir.
Lieutenant.
Yes, sir.
Get to your post. Run today's communication from Starfleet Command. I want to know my exact orders and options, if any.
Yes, sir.
Bones.
Captain, I'm
Uhura, you're the only one who can do it. I'll be right there.
Yes, sir.
Bones. Let's take a look at the library. We have a lot to learn.
Mister Chekov, phaser setting for planetary target A.
Co-ordinates seven one two stroke four, Mister Sulu.
Port batteries locked.
Still no interest, Uhura? Hmm? I could change your mind.
You are away from your post, Mister.
Is the captain here? Is Spock here? When the cat's away
Communications status.
No storm damage, sir. All stations report normal. (quietly) You're ordered to annihilate the Halkans unless they comply. No alternative.
Phasers Locked on target A, Captain. Approaching optimum range. Commence fire, Captain? Captain?
Stand by, Mister Sulu.
I've been ordered to check phaser couplings for possible damage by the storm.
Do you have authorisation from security, sir?
Captain's orders.
I'll have to check with Security Chief Sulu, sir.
Never mind. I'll attend to it.
Kirk here.
Phaser report, sir. No damage.
Very good. Thank you, Mister Scott. Kirk out.
Planet's rotation is carrying primary target beyond arc of phaser lock.
Shall I correct orbit to new firing position?
No.
Lock on to secondary city.
Aye, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, contact the Halkan council. I wish to talk to them again.
Yes, sir.
Captain?
This is a new race. They offer other things of value besides dilithium crystals.
But we cannot expect their co-operation. They have refused the Empire. Command procedure dictates that we provide the customary example.
Secondary target now moving beyond our phaser lock.
Put phasers on standby, Mister Sulu.
A serious breach of orders, Captain.
I have my reasons, and I'll make them clear to you in my own good time.
Captain, I have the leader on the Halkan Council waiting on channel B.
It is useless to resist us.
You have twelve hours to consider your position.
We will level your planet and take what we want. That is destruction. You will die as a race.
We will not argue. Twelve hours. No more. Close communications. Turn phasers off.
Aye, sir.
Twelve hours, Captain? That is unprecedented.
I shall be in my quarters. Lieutenant Uhura, have Doctor McCoy and Mister Scott meet me there.
Captain, you've placed yourself in a most grave position. This conduct must be reported.
You're at liberty to do so, Mister Spock.
Deck five, sir?
(holding a phaser on Kirk) So you die, Captain, and we all move up in rank. No one will question the assassination of a captain who has disobeyed prime orders of the Empire.
Your men, Captain. Easy, Farrell. I did your job. Ask the captain.
Sir?
Yes, he did your job.
Smart boy, switching to the top dog.
Get him out of here.
Mister Chekov was going to make me a chief. You could make me an officer.
All right. You're working for me.
A commission?
You're in line. You might even make captain.
Yes, sir.
Not on my ship.
The booth for this one, sir?
Yes, the booth. Carry on.
Here. Here. What's this?
It's called blood. Watch your step. The officers move up by assassination. Chekov tried it on me.
Mister Sulu is Security Chief, like the ancient Gestapo.
And my Sickbay is a chamber of horrors. My assistants were betting on the tolerance of an injured man. How long it would take him to pass out from the pain.
Report on technology.
Mostly variations in instrumentation. Nothing I can't handle.
Star readings?
Everything's exactly where it should be, except us.
Let's find out where we stand. Computer.
(a male voice) Ready.
This is the Captain. Record security research, to be classified under my voice print or Mister Scott's.
Recorded.
Produce all data relevant to the recent ion storm. Correlate following hypothesis. Could a storm of such magnitude cause a power surge in the transporter circuits creating a momentary interdimensional contact with a parallel universe?
Affirmative.
At such a moment, could persons in each universe, in the act of beaming, transpose with their counterparts in the other universe?
Affirmative.
Could conditions necessary to such an event be created artificially using the ship's power?
Affirmative.
Record procedure. Scotty, can you do it?
Not by myself. I'll need help. And you'd be too conspicuous.
I'm a doctor, not an engineer.
Now you're an engineer. I'll have to tap the power we need from the warp engines and balance it for the four of us.
Jim, the way this ship is run, what kind of people are we in this universe?
Let's find out. Computer.
Ready.
Read out official record of current command.
Captain James T. Kirk succeeded to command ISS Enterprise through assassination of Captain Christopher Pike. First action, suppression of Gorlan uprising through destruction of rebel home planet. Second action, execution of five thousand colonists on Vega Nine.
Cancel. Now we know.
Captain? We can do it.
Good.
We have to lay in the automatic transporter setting, but when we interrupt engine circuits to tie the power increase into the transporter, it'll show up on Sulu's security board. Of course, we'll only need a second.
I'll tell Uhura to create a diversion to distract Sulu, at your signal. Let's get back to our posts. Keep me advised.
Jim, if we're here, what do you suppose our counterparts doing back in our universe?
On our Enterprise.
I think not. Your authority on this ship is extremely limited, Captain. The four of you will remain her in the Brig and in custody until I discover how to return you to wherever it is you belong.
I can answer none of your questions at this time.
Apparently some kind of transposition has taken place. I find it extremely interesting.
Fascinating.
Captain, I am pleased that you frustrated Mister Chekov's plan. I should regret your death.
Why?
I do not desire the captaincy. I much prefer my scientific duties. I am frankly content to be a lesser target.
Logical, as always, Mister Spock.
The agony booth is a most effective means of discipline. I presume you've ordered full duration.
I haven't decided.
Indeed. His act warrants death.
I said I haven't decided.
That is, of course, your affair. Captain, may I inquire if you intend to persist in your unusual course of action regarding the Halkans?
You heard my orders.
They are, of course, in contradiction to standard Empire procedure. You cannot ignore the consequences.
Is that a threat?
I do not threaten, Captain. I merely state facts. I have found you to be an excellent officer. Our missions together have been both successful and profitable. However, I shall not permit your aberrations to jeopardise my position.
Spock, do you think we should destroy the Halkans?
Terror must be maintained or the Empire is doomed. It is the logic of history.
Conquest is easy, control is not. We may have bitten off more than we can chew.
Captain, I do not wish to find myself opposing you, but if you continue on your present course, this confusing, inexplicable behaviour,
Is my concern, not yours. You would find me a formidable enemy.
I'm aware of that, Captain. I trust that you are aware of the reverse.
Orders, sir?
Release Chekov. Confine him to quarters.
Yes, sir.
That ought to hold him for about six hours.
I fell asleep. We had quite a time in the chem lab picking up after the storm. Nothing compared to your day, I gather. I heard about Chekov.
He gambled, I won.
You got lucky. I'm surprised you could be caught off-guard that way.
I was preoccupied.
Further than that, if I'm successful.
Really? Well, you must know what you're doing. You always do. If I'm to be the woman of a Caesar, can't I know what you're up to?
Kirk here.
Mister Spock, Captain.
Yes.
I have received a private communication from Starfleet Command. I am committing a breach of regulations by informing you of its contents.
Yes, Mister Spock.
I am instructed to wait until planet dawn over principal target to permit you to carry out our mission.
And if I don't?
In that event, I am ordered to kill you and to proceed against the Halkans as the new captain of the Enterprise.
Let's drink a toast to Spock, The only man aboard with the decency to warn you, and he'll die for it. They'll never find another man like him.
I don't intend to kill him.
Are you going to act against the Halkans before the deadline?
No, but I'll avoid killing Spock.
Just get him out of the way, he and his men.
I'll get out of his way.
Shall I activate the Tantalus field? You'll at least want to monitor him, won't you?
Yes.
I hate this thing.
It's not that bad.
Of course not. It made you captain. How many enemies have you simply wiped out of existence by the touch of a button? Fifty? A hundred? Now, I always thought that was funny, The great, powerful Captain Kirk who owes everything to some unknown alien scientist and a plundered laboratory.
Well, if you don't take advantage of your opportunities
You don't rise to the command of a starship or even higher.
That magnificent mind of his. But it can't protect him from this. I press it and he dies. Now?
You really mean it. It doesn't matter. If Spock fails his order, he'll be killed anyway.
I'll see to it that the circumstances of his failure will clear him.
You're not even afraid of Starfleet Command. Can your scheme bring you that much power so quickly? And what about me? How does Marlena fit in?
How does Marlena want to fit in?
Scotty.
Scotty here, sir.
We have to get out of here within three hours. Spock has orders to kill me unless I complete the mission.
We've got another deadline, too, sir.
Explain.
The two-way matter transmission affected the local field density between the universes, and it's increasing. We've got to move fast.
How fast?
Half hour at the most.
If we miss?
We couldn't get out of here in a century. We're ready to bridge power from the engines to the transporter.
You've got to get down there and free the board so we can lock in. Give me about ten minutes.
I've got to complete a few more computations.
All right. I'll be in the transporter room in ten minutes. I'll meet you in Sickbay afterward.
Aye, sir.
Computer?
ready.
Explain computer activity in the engineering section.
A security research is in progress.
Who is conducting the research?
The Captain and Mister Scott.
What is the nature of the research?
Programme is classified under voice index log.
Why are you monitoring my communications, Mister Sulu?
My security board has detected extensive use of computer, Mister Spock. I was about to inform you.
It's not hard to guess the nature of your order from Starfleet Command. I suggest a connection. The captain suspects.
He's working on escape or defence.
That is my concern.
Correct. It's your play. I hope you succeed, because the order would fall on me next and you know how Captain Kirk's enemies have a habit of disappearing.
If I am successful, you see yourself a step nearer to the captaincy. I do not want to command the Enterprise, but if it should befall me, I suggest you remember that my operatives would avenge my death and some of them are Vulcans.
Oiling my traps, darling. I'm afraid I'm a little out of practice. Maybe that's what happened to us? It's very hard for a working officer to shine as a woman every minute, and you demand perfection.
I've never seen perfection, but no woman could come closer to it.
I remember when you used to talk that way.
I still do.
Prove it.
I've got to go.
Ship's business? An important task on the crew deck? Well, I guess it's over. Commander Kenno will take me temporarily. He's made that quite clear. I'll call a yeoman to help me with my things.
You don't have to do that.
Are you feeling sorry for me? Do I see hesitation in your eyes about anything? I want one thing, Captain. Transfer me. On the Enterprise, I am humiliated! On another ship, I can hunt fresh game. I've got my rank, and. Don't I? I've been a captain's woman, and I like it. I'll be one again if I have to go through every officer in the fleet.
You could. (She turns to slap him.) I simply meant that you could be anything you want to be.
It's been a long time since you've kissed me like that. You're a stranger. Mercy to the Halkans, mercy to Spock, to me. Am I your woman?
You're the Captain's woman until he says you're not.
Uhura? 
Yes, Captain.
Scotty's signal should be coming through any moment. You know what to do.
I've got a pretty good idea, sir.
Keep Sulu's attention off that board.
I'll do my best, sir.
Good luck. Kirk out.
You aren't very persistent, Mister Sulu. The game has rules. You're ignoring them. I protest and you come back. You didn't come back.
(wrapping his arms around her naked waist) Now you're making sense.
I was getting bored. Of course this isn't the time.
Any time's a good time.
I'm afraid I changed my mind. Again.
You take a lot of chances, Lieutenant.
(drawing her dagger) So do you, Mister. So do you. Take over for me.
Mister Scott, all clear. On my way to Sickbay.
Now it's up to the captain.
Please restrict your movements, Captain.
What are you doing? Are you going to shoot me now, Spock? I thought I had until dawn.
I shall make that decision. Since your return from the planet, you've behaved in a most atypical and illogical manner. I want to know why.
Shoot. You're wasting time.
I shall not waste time with you. You're too inflexible, too disciplined once you've made up your mind. But Doctor McCoy has a plenitude of human weaknesses, sentimental, soft. You may not tell me what I want to know, but he will.
You're running a big risk, Spock.
I have the phaser, Captain, and I do not intend to simply disappear as so many of your opponents have in the past. If you please. Sickbay.
Yes, of course. The entire landing party. Captain, stand over there. Doctor, it is time for answers.
How much time, Scotty?
Hardly fifteen minutes, sir. The field density between the two universes is starting to close very fast.
Help me get him on the table. Well, come on. Help me get him on the table. He'll die without immediate treatment.
Everything laid in, Scotty? The time lag so the operator can get into the transporter chamber?
All laid in, sir. Come on, McCoy! We're taking a chance of not getting back home.
We'll get home. This won't take long.
Fourteen minutes. We've got to go!
Shut up? I can save his life.
Do you want me to stop, Jim? It'll only take a minute.
He is very much like our own Mister Spock, isn't he? You've got that minute.
A little time, he'll live.
What is this, Mister Sulu?
Mister Spock has orders to kill you, Captain. He will succeed, apparently. You will also appear to have killed him after a fierce battle. Regrettable, but it will leave me in command.
Captain, we've barely got ten minutes.
Let's go, Bones.
I can't let him die, Jim. You get on to the transporter room. I'll be there in five minutes.
No longer.
I guarantee it. Now, go on, please.
(sitting up and grabbing McCoy's arm) Why did the captain let me live?
Our minds are merging, Doctor. Our minds are one. I feel what you feel. I know what you know.
A friend. Activate the transporter. You saved us back at Sickbay with the Tantalus field.
Take me with you.
I can't. I'm sorry. Our power is balanced for four. There's no guarantee that we'll make it with five. All could die. Scotty?
It's working, sir.
But there are only three of you.
One is coming. I'd help you if I could, Marlena. Believe that.
If you kill us, you'll still stay.
Where's McCoy? Time, Scotty.
Five minutes, sir.
Do you know what they'll do to me?
The power's cut, sir. They're on to us.
Auxiliary.
Aye, it's available.
Can you bridge to your setup?
I can get us the power, but the automatic setting is linked to the transporter main. If we bypass, that means that someone has got to operate the controls manually.
One of us will have to stay.
I'll stay, Captain.
Get to the transporter chamber. You, too, Uhura.
Jim.
That's an order, Scotty.
Aye, Captain.
What about me?
McCoy.
I cut the transporter power. It was necessary to delay your beam-out until I could arrive. Take him.
Engineering, re-activate main transporter circuits.
You're a man of integrity in both universes, Mister Spock.
You must return to your universe. I must have my captain back. I shall operate the transporter. You have two minutes and ten seconds.
In that time I have something to say. How long before the Halkan prediction of galactic revolt is realised?
Approximately two hundred and forty years.
The inevitable outcome?
The Empire shall be overthrown, of course.
The illogic of waste, Mister Spock. The waste of lives, potential, resources, time. I submit to you that your Empire is illogical because it cannot endure. I submit that you are illogical to be a willing part of it.
You have one minute and twenty three seconds.
If change is inevitable, predictable, beneficial, doesn't logic demand that you be a part of it?
One man cannot summon the future.
But one man can change the present. Be the captain of this Enterprise, Mister Spock. Find a logical reason for sparing the Halkans and make it stick. Push till it gives. You can defend yourself better than any man in the fleet.
Captain, get in the chamber!
What about it, Spock?
A man must also have the power.
In my cabin is a device that will make you invincible.
Indeed?
What will it be? Past or future? Tyranny or freedom? It's up to you.
It is time.
In every revolution, there's one man with a vision.
Captain Kirk, I shall consider it.
Spock.
Welcome home, Captain.
What I don't understand is how were you able to identify our counterparts so quickly?
It was far easier for you as civilised men to behave like barbarians, than it was for them as barbarians to behave like civilised men. I assume they returned to their Enterprise at the same time you appeared here.
Probably. However, that Jim Kirk will find a few changes, if I read my Spocks correctly.
Jim, I think I liked him with a beard better. It gave him character. Of course almost any change would be a distinct improvement.
What worries me is the easy way his counterpart fitted into that other universe. I always thought Spock was a bit of a pirate at heart.
Indeed, gentlemen. May I point out that I had an opportunity to observe your counterparts here quite closely. They were brutal, savage, unprincipled, uncivilised, treacherous, In every way, splendid examples of homo sapiens, the very flower of humanity. I found them quite refreshing.
I'm not sure, but I think we've been insulted.
I'm sure.
Captain Kirk.
Lieutenant, er, Lieutenant?
Marlena Moreau. I was just assigned last week.
All right, Lieutenant. Carry on.
You've met her before, Captain?
Uh, why do you ask?
Your reaction, One of recognition.
Oh, no. No, no. We haven't met before, exactly. She just seemed a nice, likable girl. I think we could become friends. It's possible.
The Apple
Start your readings.
Well, I just might stake out a claim and settle down here, Jim.
It is spectacular, isn't it?
It's a shame to have to intrude.
Well, the last scout ship reported some pretty strange sensor readings. Starfleet wants it investigated and the inhabitants contacted. We do what we're told.
The soil here is remarkably rich and fertile, Captain. Husbandry would be quite efficacious.
Are you sure about that?
Oh, quite sure. Readings indicate the entire planet is covered with growth like this. Curious, even at the poles there's very little variation in temperature which maintains a planet-wide average of seventy six degrees.
I know. Almost impossible.
It makes me homesick. Just like Russia.
More like the Garden of Eden, Ensign.
Of course, Doctor. The Garden of Eden was just outside Moscow. A very nice place. It must have made Adam and Eve very sad to leave.
Just outside Moscow. All right. There's a village about seventeen kilometres away on bearing two three two. We'll head that way.
Dead.
What did somebody say? That paradise must've looked like this?
As soon as we get out of the way, beam the body up.
Aye, Captain. It's a shame about Hendorff.
We seem to have a problem here, too.
What is it?
We're losing potency in our antimatter pods. I don't think it's serious, but we're looking into it.
What's causing it?
I'm not sure, sir, but we've run measurements on the electromagnetic field of the planet, and they are a wee bit abnormal. That might have something to do with it.
But you say there's nothing to worry about?
Well, sir, I didn't exactly say that.
Well, stay on top of it. We've got a job to down here. We might as well finish it.
I hear it's nice down there.
Yeah, it's nice. If we're a little more careful, we shouldn't run into any more trouble.
I could do with a nice walk in a garden with green leaves and grass.
We'll do the walking, Scotty. You get on the antimatter pod. If it gets worse, let me know, we'll beam up. Kirk out.
I find that most unusual, Captain.
Scotty will handle it. We've got a job to do. Turn up anything on your tricorder?
Indeed. Subsurface vibrations for miles in all directions.
That's strange.
Quite strong, fairly regular, artificially produced.
Mallory.
Yes, Captain?
We're heading for the village. Avoid contact with the humanoids. I want you and Marple to make a full reconnaissance. And be careful. There may be other dangers besides poisonous plants. Keep in constant communication.
Aye, aye, sir.
Captain.
What is it?
There's a humanoid hiding directly behind us, moving with remarkable agility, bearing one eight.
What is it, Mister Spock?
A visitor. One wanting to retain his anonymity, I should say.
All this beauty, and now Mister Hendorff dead, somebody watching us. It's frightening.
If you insist on worrying, worry about me. I've been wanting to get you in a place like this for a long time.
Mister Chekov, Yeoman Landon. I know you find each other fascinating, but we're not here to conduct a field experiment in human biology.
I was about to take some readings.
Anything?
Whatever it is, it moves like a cat.
Jim, I don't like this.
Neither do I. All hands. We've been watched, we'll probably be watched. We're moving out. Formation L.
Interesting. Extremely low specific gravity, some uraninite, hornblende, quartz. (breaks it in half) Fragile, good cleavage. An analysis should prove interesting.
Would you mind being careful where you throw your rocks, Mister Spock?
Obviously highly unstable, Captain. This could be a find of some importance. In large quantities, it could be a considerable source of power.
Garden of Eden, with land mines.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Scott, sir. Our antimatter pods are completely inert.
I couldn't stop it, but I know why.
Why?
Something from the surface. It's like a pail of water on a fire. A beam, maybe, or a transmission. And it's still on. I'm having it analysed, but it's like nothing I've seen before.
And it's pinpointed in the area of that village we located down there.
We're heading there now, Scotty. You need any help?
There's nothing you can do about it, sir.
There doesn't seem to be any immediate danger.
All right, Scotty. We'll try and find out what's going on down here. Kirk out.
If Scott is correct about the force from the surface, it may have to do with the vibrations I read earlier.
Some kind of generator?
If so, an immense one. Probably subterranean.
What's that?
Some of the thorns like those that killed Hendorff. See the stuff on the end? It's like saplin, only it's a thousand times stronger.
Peculiar stuff to find in paradise.
(noticing a plant moving) Jim!
I filled him with enough masiform D to make the whole crew turn handsprings, and he's not responding. Got to get him back to the ship, Jim.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Scott here, sir.
We're beaming up. Notify transporter room. And make arrangements to pick up Mallory and Marple. They're scouting ahead of us.
Aye, aye, sir. Transporter room, stand by to beam up landing party.
All hands.
Standing by, sir.
Energise.
Energise.
Scotty, energise. Scotty, what's the matter?
We can't make transporter contact, sir. The entire system's inhibited. The way it is now, we couldn't beam up a fly.
Scotty, is the transporter malfunction tied in with trouble you're having with the antimatter pods?
I don't know, sir. I'll check it and get back with you. Scott out.
Spock. Are you all right?
Doctor McCoy's potion is acting like all his potions, turning my stomach. Other than that, I am quite well.
If your blood were red instead of green, you wouldn't have an upset stomach.
Just what do you think you were trying to do?
I surmised you were unaware of that plant, so I
Stepped in front and took the thorns yourself.
I assure you, Captain, I had no intention of doing that. It was merely my own clumsiness prevented me which prevented me from moving out of the way.
I see. Well next time, just yell. I can step out of the way as quickly as the next man.
I shall do so.
Trying to get yourself killed. Do you know how much Starfleet has invested in you?
One hundred twenty two thousand two hundred
Never mind. But thanks. Kaplan, take the post.
Not only is something after us, but it's after the ship as well.
Captain, to affect the ship at this extreme range would require a highly sophisticated planetary defence system.
Thirty seconds ago, there wasn't a cloud in the sky.
Come on!
Phasers. A beautiful day, Mister Spock. Not a cloud in the sky. Just like paradise. (The scouting party has reached a collection of round huts - very African.)
Kirk here.
Mallory here, Captain. I'm near the village. Co-ordinates, one one eight by two two zero.
Mallory. Mallory, you all right? Come in!
The village is primitive. Strictly tribal from the looks of it. And Captain, there's something else. Captain, come in.
Mallory. Mallory, you all right? Mallory!
Captain. Those co-ordinates are a short distance in that direction.
On the double.
It's over there! That way! I never saw anything like
Mallory! Marple, stand back! Watch it! The rocks! (kneeling by the body) Kaplan. Hendorff. I know Kaplan's family. Now Mallory.
Jim, you couldn't have stopped any of this.
His father helped me get into the Academy.
Captain. In each case, this was unavoidable.
I could've prevented all of it.
I don't see how.
A walk in paradise, among the green grass and flowers. We should've beamed up at the first sign of trouble.
You are under orders to investigate this planet and this culture.
I also have the option to disregard those orders if I consider them overly hazardous. This isn't that important a mission, Spock. Not worth the lives of three of my men. I drop my guard for a minute because I like the smell of growing things, and now three men are dead. And the ship's in trouble.
No one has ever stated that Starfleet duty was particularly safe. You've followed the correct and logical course, done everything a commander could do. Self-recriminations (he pauses) Captain, our friend is back.
Marple, Chekov, at attention. Gentlemen, something or someone is behind that rock. I want it. Marple, cut around the rock to your right. Make a loud noise. Be careful. (Marple leaves) Spock, you and Chekov create a diversion and make it loud.
Mister Chekov, your tricorder readings are totally inefficient!
Mind your own business, sir! For your information, I have a very high efficiency rating.
Ensign, I will not have you address me in that tone of voice!
What do you want, violence?
I won't hurt you. Do you understand? I won't hurt you.
You struck me. With your hand.
Well, I won't strike you again. You've been following us, watching us. Why?
I am the eyes of Vaal. He must see.
Who is Vaal?
Vaal is Vaal. He is everything.
Do you have a name?
I am Akuta. I am the leader of the feeders of Vaal.
They're not going to hurt you. I promise you. Akuta, Akuta, we come in peace. We would like to speak to this Vaal.
Akuta alone speaks to Vaal. I am the eyes and the voice of Vaal. It is Vaal's wish.
Captain, this is fascinating. If you will permit me, sir?
Antennae?
They are my ears for Vaal. They were given to me in the dim time so the people could understand his commands and obey.
You speak of the people of Vaal. Are they nearby?
We are close to Vaal so we may serve him. I shall take you there.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Condition red. Condition red. Captain, something has grabbed us from the planet surface
Like a giant tractor beam, and we can't break loose.
It's no use, Mister Scott. We're just barely holding our own.
Scotty, are the warp drives still out?
Aye, sir. All we have is impulse power.
Put it on maximum. Full emergency circuits.
They're all on, Captain.
Status, are you still holding?
Kyle?
No, sir. We're slipping.
Computer banks, Kyle. Feed in a rate, get me a figure. We might be able to pull out with warp drive, but without it
We're like a fly on fly paper. Even worse
We're starting to lose ground. Hurry up on that figure, Kyle.
Maintain full reverse thrust against the pull. Put a team on that warp drive. Get it working.
I've done that, Captain. They haven't been able to do a thing. (Kyle hands him a PADD) It's no good, Captain. With maximum thrust against the pull
We'll only be able to maintain full power for sixteen hours, then we burn up for sure.
Scotty, you're my Chief Engineer. You know everything about that ship there is to know. More than the men who designed it. If you can't get those warp engines working
You're fired.
I'll do everything there is to do, sir. Scott out.
Tell me about Vaal.
All the world knows about Vaal. He causes the rains to fall and the sun to shine. All good comes from Vaal.
Take me to him. I wish to speak to him.
I shall take you to him, but he will not speak to you. He speaks only to me.
I'll take my chances.
Vaal.
Fascinating. A very high order of workmanship, very ancient, generating great power.
But this is not the centre, Mister Spock.
No, Captain. The centre is deep in the earth beneath us. This is an access point. It would also seem to be a
A force field?
Obviously.
You all right?
Yes, quite. It extends some thirty feet beyond the figure in all directions. Conventional in composition, and quite formidable.
Akuta, how do you talk to Vaal?
Vaal calls me. Only then.
Well, we can't get to it. We can't talk to it unless it wants to talk to us.
Vaal sleeps now. When he is hungry, you may be able to speak with him, if he desires it.
When does he get hungry?
Soon. Come. We will give you food and drink. If you are tired, you may rest.
These are the people of Vaal.
Where are the others?
There are no others.
The children.
Children? You use unknown words to me.
Little ones like yourselves. They grow.
Replacements. None are necessary. They are forbidden by Vaal.
But when a man and woman fall in love,
Love. Strange words. Children. Love. What is love?
Love is when two people are
Ah, yes. The holding, the touching. Vaal has forbidden this.
Well, there goes paradise.
These people, are from another place. They have come among us. Welcome them!
Welcome to Vaal.
(placing the equivalent of a lei around Kirk's wrist.) Our homes are open to you.
Well, thank you. It does something for you.
Yes, indeed it does, Captain. It makes me uncomfortable.
I am Sayana. You have a name?
Yes. Spock. I am Spock.
(amid general merriment) Spock?
I fail to see what they find so amusing.
Come!
This house is your house. I will send you more food and drink. You are welcome in the place of Vaal.
Now we're welcome. A while ago this whole planet was trying to kill us. It doesn't make sense.
Nothing makes sense down here. Kirk to Enterprise.
Scott here.
Status report, Scotty.
No change, Captain. The orbit is decaying along computed lines. No success with the warp drive. We're going down and we can't stop it.
I'm sick of hearing that word can't. Get that ship out of there.
Sir, we're doing everything within engineering reason.
Then use your imagination. Tie every ounce of power the ship has into the impulse engines. Discard the warp drive nacelles if you have to, and crack out of there with the main section, but get that ship out of there!
Sir, I'm going to switch over everything but the life-support systems and boost the impulse power, but that's just about as dangerous.
Do it. Kirk out.
Incredible.
Report.
I just ran a thorough check on the natives, and there's a complete lack of harmful bacteria in their systems, no decalcification, no degeneration of tissue, no arteriosclerosis. In simple terms, Jim, they're not growing old, and I can't begin to tell you how old they are, twenty years or twenty thousand years.
I see. Opinion.
Quite possible. It checks with my atmospheric analysis. Their atmosphere completely negates any harmful effects from their sun.
Add to that a simple diet, a perfectly controlled temperature, no natural enemies, apparently no vices, no replacements needed. Maybe it is paradise after all.
Mister Spock.
Apparently, our hypothesis is correct. There is no living being there. It is a machine, nothing more.
Well, the field's down, people are going in. Let's see what kind of luck we have.
That's not the way.
Evidently not. This is no ordinary machine, Captain. It may well possess a rudimentary intelligence.
But it needs to eat. Frequently. So it can't have any great power reserves.
That may not be of any help. The Enterprise has only ten hours left in which to break free.
What happens if Vaal weakens around feeding time? Spock, check the electromagnetic section of the astrophysics lab. Get an estimate of the total amount of energy being expended against the ship. Have them measure it hour by hour.
Acknowledged.
What's going on, Jim?
Mess call.
In my view, a splendid example of reciprocity.
It would take a computerised Vulcan mind such as yours to make that kind of a statement.
Doctor, you insist on applying human standards to non-human cultures. I remind you that humans are only a tiny minority in this galaxy.
There are certain absolutes, Mister Spock, and one of them is the right of humanoids to a free and unchained environment, the right to have conditions which permit growth.
Another is their right to choose a system which seems to work for them.
Jim, you're not just going to stand by and be blinded to what's going on here. These are humanoids, intelligent. They need to advance and grow. Don't you understand what my readings indicate? There's been no progress here in at least ten thousand years. This isn't life. It's stagnation.
Doctor, these people are healthy and they are happy. What ever you choose to call it, this system works, despite your emotional reaction to it.
It might work for you, Mister Spock, but it doesn't work for me. Humanoids living so they can service a hunk of tin.
Gentlemen, I think this philosophical argument can wait until our ship's out of danger. Kirk here.
Scotty, sir. We have a reading on the power source Mister Spock requested. When we first monitored, it was generating alternating cycles totalling one hundred to the twentieth power Waltham units.
Did it maintain, Scotty?
No, sir. Power's dropping bit by bit. Nominal, but a definite drain.
Good. Keep monitoring. How are you coming along with the circuit switchover?
We're putting everything but the kitchen sink into impulse power, sir. It will take us another eight hours to complete the work.
That's cutting it a bit fine, Scotty.
Aye, but if we don't break out, I'd rather we didn't have to wait too long for the end of it.
Kirk out.
Every time I think of the Enterprise burning up and us
Yeoman, you're wasting energy.
Captain, we're trapped,
Sit down, and have something to eat.
The Enterprise is up there
That hasn't happened yet. I wonder what would happen? Yeoman, speculate. What would happen if someone on this planet died?
But they can't. You said that Vaal takes care of them.
Accidents happen.
Yes, I suppose if someone were to fall off a cliff or something, that might upset the balance of the population. Then they would need a replacement.
They'd need a replacement. Opinion, Mister Spock?
I see no alternative.
But these people, I mean, if they don't know anything about. What I mean is, they don't seem to have any natural er. I mean, how is it, done?
Mister Spock? You're the science officer. Why don't you explain it to the young lady.
Well, I believe it's safe, (cough) safe to assume that they would receive the necessary instructions.
From a machine? That I'd like to see.
I understand, Vaal. It shall be done.
You know, if it weren't for Vaal this place would be a paradise.
Any place we can be together is paradise.
Pav, can the ship really break away?
I don't know.
Will we be able to get back aboard?
Martha, I don't know. But if we do have to stay here, would it be so very bad?
No, not if you're with me.
Why do you look like that?
The way they touched. I do not understand.
They were not angry. I think it was pleasant for them.
But what is to be gained? It is not a dance. It gathers no food. It does not serve Vaal. But it did seem as though it was, pleasant to them.
It is pleasant, Makora.
Yes. They touched in this way.
Vaal! He is angry.
The law is plain. I have given you the words of Vaal. Do you beg the lightning to strike?
We saw the strangers, the two of them, do this thing.
You copied them?
We meant no harm.
Vaal speaks truly to me. The newcomers are a danger. Tell the men of Vaal to meet me in the clear place when the strangers are asleep. It is Vaal's own words.
Kill, Akuta? We do not understand.
It is a thing to do, like, like feeding Vaal. Vaal explained it to me. I will show you. This (the melon) is the head of one of the strangers. Find a heavy stick. Come up from behind the stranger and do this.
It is a simple thing. It is the word of Vaal. It will be done to all of them when the sun returns in the morning.
I am concerned, Captain. This may not be an ideal society, but it is a viable one.
Bones was right. These people aren't living, they're existing. They don't create, they don't produce, they don't even think. They exist to service a machine.
If we do what it seems we must, in my opinion it will be in direct violation of the non-interference directive.
These are people, not robots. They should have the opportunity of choice. We owe it to them to interfere.
Starfleet Command may think otherwise.
I'll take my chances. Why don't you have a look around? Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott?
Here, sir.
How's it going, Scotty?
Almost ready, sir. We need half an hour yet.
You realise that within forty five minutes, the ship will be pulled down into the atmosphere?
I know that. As you said, that's cutting things fine.
Yes, I
Captain!
Kirk out. What is it?
Disturbing. The people of Vaal seem to have disappeared.
Force field, Captain.
Vaal, we are on a peaceful mission. We mean no harm to you or your people.
Variation in impulses, Captain. I believe it is reading us. A strong jump on all wavelengths.
Let's get out of here!
Bones!
Second degree burns. Not serious, but I'll bet they smart.
Doctor, you have an unsurpassed talent for understatement.
Marple!
Put them in the hut. Find out where the women are. Put them in there, too.
The good doctor was concerned that the Vaalians achieved true human stature. I submit there is no cause for worry. They've taken the first step. They've learned to kill.
We're ready here, sir. All available power has been channelled into the impulse engines. We have twelve minutes before entering atmosphere.
All right, Scotty, put her in full reverse. Get her out of there.
Full reverse, Mister Kyle, all engines.
Sir!
Captain, we're doing it. We're pulling away!
Scotty, what happened?
It's no good, sir. There's only a few systems responding.
Captain, we've pulled away a little. We gained maybe an hour, but we blew almost every system in the ship doing it.
There's nothing left to try again. I guess you'll have to fire me, sir.
You're fired. Four hundred people
Jim
They'll die because I couldn't see a warning sign. I had to follow orders, always orders.
Get back in there.
Fine time to ring the dinner bell.
Get back in there. Now!
Bones, that's it. Stay with Chekov. Keep those people from feeding Vaal. Don't let them feed Vaal. Keep them in the hut. Mister Spock.
Scotty, do you still have phaser power?
Aye, but what
Lock all banks on the co-ordinates of the energy field located down here.
Aye, sir, but they won't penetrate that force field.
If my guess is correct, they won't have to. Stand by.
Vaal calls to us. Let us go to him. He hungers. Please.
I would assume so.
Good. The ship's pulling away must have weakened it considerable. It has to be fed, but its reserve capacity could hold out for days.
If it had to reinforce its energy field to ward off a phaser attack, it would have to draw more heavily on its reserves.
My plan exactly. Scotty.
Scott here, sir.
Scotty, commence firing and maintain.
Mister Kyle, all phasers commence firing.
A tremendous upsurge in generated power, Captain. Obviously Vaal is trying to reinforce his energy field.
Good. Let's see how long he can do it.
Scotty, cease fire.
No power generation at all, Captain. Vaal is dead.
Mister Scott, status report.
Tractor beam gone. Potency returning to antimatter pods.
I'll have all engineering sections working on the circuits immediately. Transporter'll be ready in an hour.
Scotty, you're re-hired. As soon as the transporter's fixed, form an engineering detail with full analytical equipment and beam them down. Kirk out. Chekov, Bones. Let those people go.
But it was Vaal who put the fruit on the trees, caused the rain to fall. Vaal cared for us.
You'll learn to care for yourselves, with our help. And there's no trick to putting fruit on trees. You might enjoy it. You'll learn to build for yourselves, think for yourselves, work for yourselves, and what you create is yours. That's what we call freedom. You'll like it, a lot. And you'll learn something about men and women, the way they're supposed to be. Caring for each other, being happy with each other, being good to each other. That's what we call love. You'll like that, too, a lot. You and your children.
What are children?
The little ones? Look like you? Just go on the way you're going. You'll find out.
I don't agree with you at all, Mister Spock.
That's not unusual, Doctor.
Jim, I want you to hear this.
Captain, I'm not at all certain we did the correct thing on Gamma Trianguli Six.
We put those people back on a normal course of social evolution. I see nothing wrong in that.
Well, that's a good object lesson, Mister Spock. It's an example of what can happen when a machine becomes too efficient, does too much work for you.
Captain, you are aware of the biblical story of Genesis.
Yes, of course I'm aware of it. Adam and Eve tasted the apple and as a result were driven out of paradise.
Precisely, Captain, and in a manner of speaking, we have given the people of Vaal the apple, the knowledge of good and evil if you will, as a result of which they too have been driven out of paradise.
Doctor, do I understand him correctly? Are you casting me in the role of Satan?
Not at all, Captain.
Is there anyone on this ship who even remotely looks like Satan?
I am not aware of anyone who fits that description, Captain.
No, Mister Spock. I didn't think you would be.
The Doomsday Machine
The distress call definitely came from one of the solar systems in this sector.
Can you pinpoint it any closer, Lieutenant?
Negative. It was so badly garbled all we got was the name Constellation, then we lost it.
Sir, we're now within the limits of System L-370, but I can't seem to locate
Captain, sensors show this entire solar system has been destroyed. Nothing left but rubble and asteroids.
But that's incredible. The star in this system is still intact. Only a nova could destroy like that.
Nonetheless, Captain, sensors show nothing but debris where we charted seven planets last year.
Continue a search pattern.
Aye, aye, sir.
Entering limits of System L-374, sir. Scanners show the same evidence of destruction.
Every solar system in this sector blasted to rubble and still no sign of the Constellation. Matt Decker's in command. What could have happened to him?
Captain, the two inner most planets of this system appear to be intact.
Sir, I'm picking up a ship's disaster beacon.
Try to raise it, Lieutenant.
I have it on the sensors, Captain. By configuration, a starship stopped in space. She appears to be drifting.
No answer, Captain. All I get is the automatic beacon.
Sensors not recording normal energy output.
Approach course, Mister Sulu.
It's the Constellation. Look at that.
She may have been wrecked by whatever destroyed these solar systems.
She was attacked. Red alert! Red alert! Man your battle stations!
Red alert. Red alert. Man your battle stations.
Mister Sulu?
All phaser banks manned and ready, sir.
Very good. Initiate a full sensor scan of the immediate area for any other vessel.
Aye, sir.
Lieutenant Palmer.
I can't raise the Constellation, sir. I'm still getting the distress beacon, but there's heavy subspace interference. It's almost blocking the signal.
Keep trying. Mister Spock, full evaluation of the damage to the Constellation.
All power plants dead, reserve energy banks operative at a very low power level.
Life support systems?
Also operative at a low power level. The entire Bridge is damaged and uninhabitable. The rest of the ship seems able to sustain life.
Radiation levels?
Normal, but subspace interference makes readings difficult.
No other vessels in the area, Captain. All scanners show clear.
All hands, go to Yellow Alert. Stand by battle stations. Lieutenant, have Doctor McCoy, Mister Scott, and a damage control party report to me in the transporter room.
Aye, aye, sir.
We're going to board her. Mister Spock, you're in command.
Acknowledged.
Radiation level normal. Atmospheric pressure eleven pounds per square inch.
The whole communication system looks to be shorted out, too, sir.
Scotty, check the phaser banks. See if they've been fired. Bones, you come with me.
Come along, lads.
What a mess.
No clutter, no half-empty cups of coffee. Whatever happened didn't happen without a warning.
What do you think did it, sir?
I don't know, lad. But I want a full structural and control damage check, and I'm going to have a look at those engines.
The crew wasn't abducted, they just left. Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise, Spock here.
No survivors, no bodies either.
Is it possible they could have beamed down to one of the two planets?
Improbable, Captain. The surface temperature of the inner planet is that of molten lead. The other has an atmosphere poisonous to human life.
We'll continue our search. Kirk out.
Captain, I've checked the engines. The warp drive is a hopeless pile of junk. The impulse engines are not too badly off. We ought to be able to do something with them.
Phaser banks?
Exhausted. They didn't give up without a battle.
But where are they? I can't imagine a man like Matt Decker abandoning ship while his life support systems were still operative.
Computer system is still intact. We can playback the duplicate Captain's Log from the auxiliary control room.
Matt. Matt, it's Jim Kirk.
Commodore? Commodore Decker? (he injects him)
Matt? Matt.
Kirk. It's Jim Kirk.
What happened to your ship, Matt?
A ship. Attacked. That, that thing.
What thing? What was it?
That
Answer me! What was it? What happened, Matt?
Jim, give him a minute. He's in a state of shock.
Ready with the duplicate log, sir.
Go.
Captain's log, stardate 4202.1. Exceptionally heavy subspace interference still prevents our contacting Starfleet to inform them of the destroyed solar systems we have encountered. We are now entering system L-374. Science Officer Masada reports the fourth planet seems to be breaking up. We are going to investigate.
The fourth planet. Only two left now. Scotty, pull the microtapes from the sensor memory banks and beam them aboard to Spock. I want a full analysis, a complete report of what happened when they went in on that planet.
We tried to contact Starfleet. No one heard. No one! We couldn't run.
What happened to your crew?
Oh, I had to beam them down. We were dead. No power, our phasers useless. I stayed behind, the last man. The Captain, the last man aboard the ship. That's what you're supposed to do, isn't it? And then it hit again and the transporter went out. They were down there, and I'm up here.
What hit? What attacked you?
They say there's no devil, Jim, but there is. Right out of hell, I saw it.
Matt, where's your crew?
On the third planet.
There is no third planet.
Don't you think I know that? There was, but not anymore. They called me. They begged me for help, four hundred of them. I couldn't. I couldn't. (breaks down in tears)
Captain, Washburn has our report.
Go.
We made a complete check on structural and control damage, sir. As far as we can tell, something crashed through the deflectors and knocked out the generators. Somehow the antimatter in the warp drive pods has been deactivated.
Deactivated? Scotty, could some kind of general energy dampening field do that, and would the same type of thing account for the heavy subspace interference?
Aye, that all adds up. But what sort of a thing could do all that?
If you'd seen it, you'd know. The whole thing's a weapon. It must be.
What does it look like?
Well, it's miles long, with a maw that could swallow a dozen starships. It destroys planets, chops them into rubble.
What is it, an alien ship? Or is it alive, or is it
Both or neither. I don't know.
Matt, your log stated that the fourth planet was breaking up. You went in to investigate.
We saw this thing hovering over the planet, slicing out chunks of it with a force beam.
Did you run a scanner check on it? What kind of a beam?
Pure antiproton. Absolutely pure.
(answers communicator) Kirk here.
Spock here, Captain.
Unable to raise Starfleet Command due to heavy subspace interference.
Attempting to remedy.
What about the Constellation's tapes?
She was attacked by what appears to be essentially a robot, an automated weapon of immense size and power. Its apparent function is to smash planets to rubble and then digest the debris for fuel. It is, therefore, self-sustaining as long as there are planetary bodies for it to feed on.
A robot weapon that purposely destroys entire solar systems. Why?
Unknown, Captain. However, Mister Sulu has computed the path of the machine, using the destroyed solar systems as a base course. Projecting back on our star charts, we find that it came from outside, from another galaxy.
What is the projected course of this thing?
If it follows its present path, it will go through the most densely populated section of our galaxy.
Thank you. Stand by, Mister Spock. Kirk out.
This whole thing's incredible. A robot? A machine like that, who would build it?
We don't know. An alien race, apparently from another galaxy.
But why?
Bones, did you ever hear of a doomsday machine?
No. I'm a doctor, not a mechanic.
It's a weapon built primarily as a bluff. It's never meant to be used. So strong, it could destroy both sides in a war. Something like the old H-Bomb was supposed to be. That's what I think this is. A doomsday machine that somebody used in a war uncounted years ago. They don't exist anymore, but the machine is still destroying.
Oh, forget about your theories! That thing is on the way to the heart of our galaxy. What are you going to do about it?
Take it easy.
The first thing we're going to do is get you back to the Enterprise.
Oh, no, I stay here. I'm not leaving my ship!
There's no ship to leave. It's a dead hulk! We'll take her in tow. I'll stay onboard and get her ready. You go back to the Enterprise with the doctor and let him help you.
It's just that I, I, I never lost a command before.
Kirk to Enterprise. Have the transporter room beam Doctor McCoy and Commodore Decker on board immediately.
Red alert! Red alert!
Come on.
It came up on us fast, Captain, but we seem able to maintain our distance.
We're blind here. What's it look like?
It looks very much like Commodore Decker's planet killer. And it is pursuing us. (The viewscreen now shows it head-on. A round opening with a small sun partway down the gullet.)
We are more manoeuvrable, but it is gaining on us. Sensors indicate some kind of total conversion drive.
No evidence of life, subspace interference level incredibly high.
Whatever it is, we can't let it go beyond us to the next solar system. We have to stop it. If it's a robot, what are the chances of deactivating it?
I would say none, Captain. The energy generated by our power nacelles seems to attracts it. I doubt we could manoeuvre close enough without drawing a direct attack upon ourselves.
I also believe the nature of this machine precludes the possibility of easy access to its control mechanisms.
It's closing on us, Mister Spock.
Closing, Captain.
All right. Lower your deflector screens Long enough to beam us aboard.
Acknowledged.
Transporter Room, stand by to beam landing party aboard.
Ready to beam, sir.
Evasive action, Mister Sulu.
Aye, sir.
Damage report, all stations.
Mister Spock, the transporter's out.
Affect repairs. Captain Kirk, come in please.
Kirk here.
Captain, we've been attacked. The transporter is damaged. We're taking evasive action.
Mister Spock, communication's damaged. We're unable to override interference.
Damage in communications, Captain. Interference will (static)
Spock? Spock? Come in, Spock. Spock? We're stuck, blind, and deaf.
And paralysed. No power.
Well, we just can't stand around while our ship is being attacked. Scotty, you've got to get me some manoeuvering power.
I can't repair warp drive without a spacedock.
Then get me impulse power. Half-speed, quarter-speed, anything. If we get this hulk moving, maybe we can do something.
Aye, the impulse engines are still in fair shape. I might coax them.
Then get moving.
Come on, lad.
Washburn, you get in there. Let's see what we can do about this viewing screen. I've got to find out what's happening out there.
No casualties, Mister Spock. How are we doing?
We have outrun it, Doctor.
Status report.
Impulse and warp engines operative, transporter and communications under repair. Random chance seems to have operated in our favour.
In plain, non-Vulcan English, we've been lucky.
I believe I said that, Doctor.
It's veering off, back on course for the next solar system. The Rigel colony, sir.
Evidently programmed to ignore anything as small as a ship beyond a certain radius. We'll maintain a discreet distance and circle back to pick up the Captain.
You can't let that reach Rigel. Why, millions of innocent people would die.
I am aware of the Rigel system's population, Commodore, but we are only one ship. Our deflector shields are strained, our subspace transmitter is useless. Logically, our primary duty is to survive in order to warn Starfleet Command.
Our primary duty is to maintain life and safety of Federation planets. Do you deny that?
Mister Sulu, you will lay in an evasive course back to the Constellation.
Aye, aye, sir.
Belay that last order, helmsman. One hundred and eighty degree turn, hard about. We're going to attack.
You will carry out my last order, Mister Sulu.
Mister Spock, I'm officially notifying you that I'm exercising my option under regulations as a Starfleet Commodore, and that I am assuming command of the Enterprise.
You have the right to do so, but I would advise against it.
That thing must be destroyed.
You tried to destroy it once before, Commodore. The result was a wrecked ship and a dead crew.
I made a mistake then. We were too far away. This time I'm going to hit it with full phasers at point-blank range.
Sensors show the object's hull is solid neutronium. A single ship cannot combat it.
Mister Spock, that will be all. You have been relieved of command. Don't force me to relieve you of duty as well.
You can't let him do this, Spock.
Doctor, you are out of line.
So are you, sir. Well, Spock?
Unfortunately, Starfleet Order 104, Section B, leaves me no alternative. Paragraph 1A clearly states
To blazes with regulations! You can't let him take command when you know he's wrong!
If you can certify Commodore Decker medically or psychologically unfit for command, I can relieve him under Section C.
I'll certify that right now.
You'll also be asked to produce your medical records to prove it.
Now, you know I haven't had time to run an examination on him.
Then your statement would not be considered valid.
You may leave the Bridge, Doctor.
What about the Captain? We can't leave
Doctor, you may leave the Bridge.
Spock, do something!
Mister Spock knows his duty under regulations, Doctor. Do you? (McCoy leaves) Hard about, helmsman. Course thirty two degrees, mark ten. Deflectors at full power. Ready on main phaser banks.
Aye, aye, sir.
Kirk here.
Captain, the impulse engines' control circuits are fused solid.
What about the warp drive control circuits?
Aye, we can cross-connect the controls, but it'll make the ship almost impossible for one man to handle.
You worry about your miracles, Scotty, I'll worry about mine. Get to work.
Aye, sir.
Washburn, try the 2G6 circuit.
Closing fast.
Deflector shields at full power. They can't take much more of this.
Helmsman, hold your course. Stand by all phaser banks.
Aye, aye, sir.
Deflectors holding, but weakening. We must retreat, Commodore. The energy drain
I'm in command here, Mister Spock. Maintain your course, helmsman. Get us in closer.
Ready to give it a try?
Just one minute, sir.
Scotty, how you doing?
Controls are all hooked up, sir. We should have some power for you soon.
Try it now, Captain.
Yes, I think (an image of tiny Enterprise and the giant planet killer comes on screen) What the devil's going on?
Fire!
Direct hit. It just bounced off.
Commodore, I urgently recommend immediate withdrawal.
Recommendation noted. Maintain course. Fire!
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Enterprise, come in. Mister Spock, come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, where's that power?
Coming, sir. If I push these impulse engines too hard in the condition they're in, they'll blow apart.
Washburn, get down to Engineering. Assist Mister Scott.
Aye, sir. (leaves)
Scotty, push it right to the edge. This ship has got to manoeuver.
Aye, sir.
(to Spock) Sir, Deck seven reports power failure in main energisers. Implementing emergency procedures. (another hit) Severe casualties reported on decks three and four. Damage control party sealing off inner hull rupture.
It has ceased fire. We're being held in a tractor beam. We're being pulled inside, Commodore. You must veer off.
Maintain phaser fire, helmsman.
We have lost warp power. If we don't break the tractor beam within sixty seconds, we never will.
But don't you understand? We've got to destroy it!
That, sir, is illogical. It is suicide. Attempted suicide would be proof that you are psychologically unfit for command. If you don't veer off, I shall relieve you on that basis.
Veer off.
Emergency impulse power.
We can't break loose!
We haven't got it. We're being pulled inside.
Scotty, give me that power.
You've got it, Captain. Just enough to move us. I can't do better.
That'll do. Full ahead, Mister Scott.
That's it, Mister Scott. Keep that power coming.
Full power astern.
Aye, sir. We still can't move.
Keep pouring it on, Scotty.
Captain, I still don't know what we're doing.
We're moving, the Enterprise isn't. Maybe that thing will see us and let the Enterprise go. If I only had some phasers.
Phasers? You've got 'em. I have one bank recharged.
Scotty, you've just earned your pay for the week. Stand by. Fire phasers.
We're loose, Commodore.
Good boy, Jim. Between the two of us, we'll kill that thing.
Mister Scott, it worked. Great. (sees that maw turning towards them) I think it's great. Scotty, get us out of here.
It's closing fast on the Constellation.
Standing by, sir.
Commodore, I suggest
Kirk pulled us out of there by distracting it. Now it's our turn. Fire phasers. (they do) We did it! Hard about. Give me some distance.
We're moving away, Commodore.
This machine seems to have a programmed defensive sphere. Any energy source entering that field is subject to attack.
Mister Spock, status report.
Warp drive and deflectors will be out for a solar day. Repairs proceeding on transporter and communications.
It's closing with us again, sir.
Maintain speed and distance.
It's sucking in space rubble from those destroyed planets. Refueling itself.
We can maintain this speed for only seven hours before we exhaust our fuel, but it can refuel itself indefinitely.
Then we'll have to fight it now before it gets any stronger.
Illogical. We cannot destroy it. Therefore, we cannot save Rigel. We must transport the Captain and the others from the Constellation and escape this thing's subspace interference in order to warn Starfleet Command.
Mister Spock, we've pierced the interference locally.
Can you raise Starfleet?
No, sir, but I've got ship-to-ship communications back. Picking up Captain Kirk.
On audio, Lieutenant.
Enterprise. Enterprise, come in.
Mister Spock, I am still in command. I will speak for this ship. Enterprise to Kirk.
Commodore Decker speaking.
Matt. What's going on? Give me Mister Spock.
I'm in command here, Jim.
What happened to Spock?
Nothing. I assumed command according to regulations
Since your first officer was reluctant to take aggressive action against the
You are speaking to a senior officer, Kirk.
Give me Spock.
I told you, I am in command here, according to every rule in the book, Captain. Anything you have to say at all, you will say to me.
There's only one thing I want to say to you, Commodore. Get my ship out of there.
Mister Spock, ship status.
Commodore.
Down here. (the arm of the Captain's chair)
Warp drive out. Deflector shields down. Transporter under repair. We are on emergency impulse power.
How long to repair warp drive?
At least one solar day.
At our present rate of consumption, we'll exhaust our impulse power long before then.
It's gaining on us, sir.
Take evasive action, Mister Sulu.
I told you, I am in command here and I will give the orders, Captain. We're going to turn and attack.
Not with my ship, you don't.
Mister Spock, relieve Commodore Decker immediately. That's a direct order.
You can't relieve me and you know it. According to regulations
Blast regulations! Mister Spock, I order you to assume command on my personal authority as Captain of the Enterprise.
Commodore Decker, you are relieved of command.
I don't recognise your authority to relieve me.
You may file a formal protest with Starfleet Command, assuming we survive to reach a Starbase. But you are relieved. Commodore. I do not wish to place you under arrest.
You wouldn't dare. (Spock signals the guards forward) You're bluffing.
Vulcans never bluff.
No. No, I don't suppose that they do. Very well, Mister Spock. The Bridge is yours.
Captain, I have assumed command.
Good. Now, Mister Spock
One moment, sir. Commodore. I believe you are scheduled for medical examination. Mister Montgomery.
You will accompany the commodore to Sickbay.
Mister Sulu, change course. Seven zero mark two one.
Mark twenty one, sir.
Captain, we are taking an evasive course back to you. We will try to stay ahead of the object until we can transport you aboard.
Fine. Just make sure you stay ahead of it.
Captain Kirk.
Yes, Scotty.
I've hooked in ship's communication. The best I can give you on impulse is one third power. The shields are up but they won't last long.
Keep it going, Scotty, keep it going. Mister Spock.
Yes, sir.
I'm plotting an intercept course. Will rendezvous with you at fourteen thirteen point seven hours.
Mister Spock, someone's opening the shuttlecraft bay doors.
Shut them, Mister Sulu.
It's too late, sir.
Kirk to Enterprise. Why are you launching a shuttlecraft?
Whoever it is, Captain, has no authorisation. Lieutenant, raise the shuttlecraft.
Enterprise to shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft.
Enterprise to shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft. Come in, shuttlecraft.
Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Decker here.
Commodore, I must insist that you return to the ship.
You said it yourself, Spock. There is no way to blast through the hull of that machine, so I'm going to take this thing right down its throat.
This is Kirk. Matt, you'll be killed.
I've been prepared for death ever since I, ever since I killed my crew.
No one expects you to die for an error in judgment.
The commander is responsible for the lives of his crew, and for their deaths. Well, I should have died with mine.
You cannot succeed, Commodore. Your only logical alternative is to return to the ship.
Matt. Matt, listen to me. You can't throw your life away like this. Matt, you're a starship commander. That makes you a valuable commodity.
We need you, your experience, your judgment. Matt! (Decker turns off the intercom)
We're stronger with you than without you!
He's gone. Constellation, come in, please.
Captain Kirk, come in please.
Kirk here.
Sir, may I offer my condolences on the death of your friend. It is most regrettable.
It's regrettable that he died for nothing.
Mister Spock, sensors indicate a minute drop in the machine's power emanations. Do you think the shuttlecraft explosion might have done some damage?
What about that, Spock? Is it possible?
The drop in power is definite, Captain but negligible. The object is still pursing us, thereby causing us to drain our power reserve at a much greater rate.
Mister Spock, the transporter is now operational.
Transporter operational, Captain. Shall we beam you aboard?
Negative.
Mister Scott and I will stay here, but beam the damage control party aboard.
There's little to be gained by staying aboard the Constellation.
Except possibly the destruction of that thing out there. Carry out your orders, Mister Spock.
Acknowledged. Transporter Room. Beam damage control party aboard.
Aye, aye, sir.
Spock, listen. Maybe Matt Decker didn't die for nothing. He had the right idea but not enough power to do it. Am I correct in assuming that a fusion explosion of ninety seven megatons will result if a starship impulse engine is overloaded?
No, sir. Ninety seven point eight three five megatons.
Ninety seven point eight three five. Will it be powerful enough to destroy that thing out there?
Negative, Captain. Its hull is pure neutronium. There is no known way of blasting through it.
Not through it, Spock, from inside it. Will it be enough?
Insufficient data. I shall try to take further sensor readings.
Do the best you can and make it fast. Kirk to Scott.
Here, sir. The damage control party just beamed back to the Enterprise.
Good. Scotty, can you set the ship's impulse engines to overload?
Aye. The shape the thing's in, it's hard to keep her from blowing.
Aye, sir.
Set it and get up here as fast as you can.
Right away.
Captain?
The object's neutronium hull makes sensor readings of the inner mechanism impossible.
Spock, you don't know?
Correct.
Captain, you're getting dangerously close to the planet killer.
I intend to get a lot closer. I'm going to ram her right down that thing's throat.
Jim, you'll be killed, just like Decker.
No. No, I don't intend to die, Mister Spock. We've rigged a delay detonation device. You'll have thirty seconds to beam me aboard the Enterprise before the Constellation's impulse engines blow.
Your chances of survival are not promising. We don't even know if the explosion will be powerful enough.
A calculated risk, Mister Spock.
There's another factor, Captain. The transporter is not working at one hundred percent efficiency.
Thirty seconds is very slim timing.
A chance I'll have to take. Kirk out.
A cranky transporter's a mighty finicky piece of machinery to be gambling your life on, sir.
What about the detonator?
I've linked it in with the impulse control system. (flips a switch) It's armed now. Press this one. Thirty seconds later, poof! Once it's activated, there's no way to stop it.
Understood. Mister Spock. Prepare to beam Scotty on board.
Transporter, stand by.
Good luck, Captain.
Thank you.
What's the matter with that thing?
It's a power drain somewhere, sir. I almost lost you.
It'll never work like this. It's the main junction circuitry. I'll get it.
Bridge. Transporter malfunction.
Transporter is out, Captain. You'll have to stand by.
I can't. Power level's dropping too fast. You'd better hurry.
Acknowledged.
Mister Scott, speed is of the essence.
He's two thousand miles from the planet killer and closing fast.
Bridge, transporter operational, but this jury-rigging won't last for long. He's got to come off now.
I'll stand by here.
Fifteen hundred miles and closing.
Captain, transporter operational, but just barely.
Prepare to beam me aboard on my signal.
One thousand miles and closing.
Transporter, stand by.
Standing by, sir.
Five hundred miles and closing.
Beam me aboard.
Energise.
Energising. Bridge, it's shorted out again.
Och, what's wrong with it?
Gentlemen, beam me aboard.
We can't, Captain. Transporter is out again.
Mister Scott, twenty seconds to detonation.
Mister Scott?
Mister Scott
Try inverse phasing.
Sixty, fifty, forty
Thirty.
Gentlemen, I suggest you beam me aboard.
Ten
Nine, eight
Seven.
Mister Scott?
Try her now, Mister Kyle.
Six.
Five, four
Bridge, we got him through!
Energy output zero. Radiation level normal.
Welcome aboard, Captain. Sensors show all energy sources deactivated. It's quite dead.
Mister Sulu, ease us back to minimum headway. Conserve power as much as possible. Lieutenant Palmer, tell Mister Scott to expedite repairs on the warp drive. Poor Matt. He gave his life in an attempt to save others. Not the worst way to go.
Indeed, Captain. I presume your log will show that Commodore Decker died in the line of duty.
Indeed it shall, Mister Spock. Ironic, isn't it? Way back in the 20th century, the H-Bomb was the ultimate weapon, their doomsday machine, and we used something like it to destroy another doomsday machine. Probably the first time such a weapon has ever been used for constructive purposes.
Appropriate, Captain. However, I can't help wondering if there are any more of those weapons wandering around the universe.
Well, I certainly hope not. I found one quite sufficient.
Catspaw
Still no response, sir.
No, keep it open. I don't like this. Nothing since the first check in. Scott and Sulu should've contacted us again a half an hour ago.
They may have nothing to report. Our sensors indicate no life forms except our landing party.
Both those men are well aware of landing party procedure. They should've checked in with us by now.
Contact established, Captain.
Jackson to Enterprise.
Enterprise. Kirk here.
One to beam up, Enterprise.
One? Jackson, where are Scott and Sulu?
I'm ready to beam up, sir.
Jackson!
I'm sorry. I can't clear it, Captain.
Notify Transporter room to prepare to beam up one member of the landing party. Then have Doctor McCoy report to me in the Transporter room on the double.
Yes, sir.
Ready, sir.
Energise.
What's on, Jim?
Trouble. (one man materialises) Jackson, where are the others?
The man is dead.
(from the mouth of Jackson) Captain Kirk, can you hear me? There is a curse on your ship. Leave this place or you will all die.
Odd. Our probe data didn't indicate fog.
No cloud formations, no bodies of water, no changes in surface temperature. Under these conditions, fog is highly unlikely, Captain. According to our transporter co-ordinates this is the exact location from which Jackson was beamed up to the ship.
Readings, Mister Spock.
No indications of. A moment, Captain. Picking up life form readings. Twenty four degrees mark seven. Range one thirty seven point one six metres. Multiple readings, Captain.
Scott and Sulu?
Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise. Lieutenant Uhura here.
What are the ship's sensors reading now, Lieutenant?
Report, Mister.
I am only picking up physical impulses from the three of them. As far as instruments can make out, there is nothing else down there that's alive.
Relay, Lieutenant.
Captain, we are only registering on you. (static) Captain? Captain Kirk?
Lieutenant, can you hear me?
Whatever this stuff is, it's getting thicker. Suppose that has anything to do with the interference?
I don't know. There has to be some explanation for the fact that the ship's sensors can't register anything but us, while we're picking up readings of multiple life forms. Are they still there, Spock?
No change, Captain.
Stand-by alert.
Listen. Now, what do you think that
Quiet.
Who are you?
Spock. Comment?
Very bad poetry, Captain.
A more useful comment, Mister Spock.
What we've just seen is not real.
That's useful.
However, on azimuth twenty four, at just over one hundred metres, there are definitely life forms. Erratic, confused, but definitely registering.
That's where we're going.
That was a pretty real illusion, Mister Spock.
Jim.
This is the source of the life form readings, Captain. They're inside, somewhere.
Kirk to Enterprise. Enterprise, come in.
Is this how we lost contact with the first landing party?
What about it, Spock? Does this structure have anything to do with communicator interference?
I would say not, Captain. There's no indication of anything that would cause such interference.
And it doesn't pick up on our ship's sensors.
Nor do our sensors register the life forms inside.
Could it be exerting a force field of some kind that cuts into our sensor scan.
Then it would affect Spock's tricorder too, wouldn't it?
Three witches, what appears to be a castle and a black cat.
If we weren't missing two officers and a third one dead I'd say someone was playing an elaborate trick or treat on us.
Trick or treat, Captain?
Yes, Mister Spock. You'd be a natural. I'll explain it to you one day. Shall we have a look around?
That would seem to be in order.
(sending them off in different directions) Bones. Spock.
They're gone, Mister DeSalle. The captain and the others simply stopped registering.
Check for malfunctions.
I did, sir, as soon as it happened.
Mister DeSalle, that's exactly what happened to Mister Scott and his party. They, they just disappeared.
Nobody just disappears. They may have encountered a magnetic field or some other obstruction. Mister Chekov, recalibrate your sensors. If you need help
I can do it, sir. I'm not that green.
Lieutenant Uhura, continue in your efforts to break through that static interference.
Aye, aye, sir.
We know they're down there. I want them found.
Straight ahead, Mister Spock?
The readings would so indicate.
Dust, cobwebs. Halloween is right.
Spock. Are you all right?
Yes. I am undamaged, Captain.
Bones? (sees another skeleton chained to the wall) Doc?
You were saying something about trick or treat.
Dungeons, curses, skeletons and iron maidens. They're all Earth manifestations. Why?
I do not know, Captain, but these things do exist. They are real.
Could this be an Earth parallel development of some sort?
None of this parallels any human development. It's more like a human nightmare.
As if someone knew what it was that terrifies man most on an instinctive level.
Ghost stories, ogres, demons. The whole
Scotty, Sulu. Scotty. Put down the phaser. Scotty!
They appear to be drugged, Jim. Look at their eyes. Hardly blink at all.
Neither did Jackson just before he collapsed.
These two are alive. Scotty, do you hear me? Sulu, do you know who I am? What's happened to you?
They're going to release us.
Stop!
Whoever you are, you've proven your skill at creating illusion. Now I want to know why and what you've done to my men.
Where did your race get this ridiculous predilection for resistance? You examine any object, you question everything. Is it not enough to accept what is?
Not when one of my men is dead because of it and two others turned into mindless
NO, not mindless. These two are merely controlled, Captain Kirk. Oh, yes, we know who you are. All of you. (to the cat) Don't we, my precious?
Who are you? Why did you bring us here?
My name is Korob. And as for bringing you here, it was you who quite contrarily insisted upon coming. You were warned to stay away.
Why? For what reason? Why all the mumbo-jumbo?
Mumbo-jumbo? (the cat meows as if explaining) Oh! Oh, no, I assure you it was not that, Captain.
Mapping expeditions have charted this solar system before. There never have been any life forms on Pyris Seven.
It is of no importance that we are not native to this planet. (meow) Oh! I'm told that I've been an inattentive host, gentlemen. You will join me for something to refresh yourselves.
That cat.
That cat.
There are ancient Earth legends about wizards and their familiars.
Familiars?
Demons in animal forms sent by Satan to serve the wizard.
Superstition.
I do not create the legend, Captain. I merely report it.
You are the different one, Mister Spock. You do not think like the others. There are no colours to your patterns of logic. There's only black and white. You see all this around you, yet you do not believe.
He doesn't know about trick or treat.
I do not understand that reference, therefore it also is of no importance. Gentlemen, I can be most hospitable.
Ingenious.
Do be seated.
We're not hungry.
But I insist.
All right, Korob. What do you want from us?
For the moment, merely that you eat and enjoy. Oh, Doctor, do try the wine. You'll find it excellent.
You'll find us most unco-operative unless you start explaining yourself.
Hopefully I can change that attitude.
These look real.
They are, I assure you. Diamonds, rubies, emeralds, sapphires. All the crystalline forms that you cherish above all things. A fortune of them for each of you if you leave here without further inquiry.
We could manufacture a ton of these on our ship. They mean nothing to us.
Valueless? I don't understand. I read
Whatever it is you read, you read it wrong. As for leaving, we'll leave when we're ready.
You are most unpredictable. Perhaps I have made a small mistake. Nevertheless, you have passed the tests.
Tests?
Yes. Our analysis of you may have been in some small way in error, but you were warned to stay away and yet you came to save your comrades. That proves loyalty. Your bravery was tested and you did not frighten. And despite my failure with these bright baubles, I perceive that you cannot be bribed. In many ways you are quite admirable. (meow) Quite right. Go at once, yes.
Gentlemen, my colleague. Sylvia.
Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock and Captain Kirk. You wanted to know what we did to your men. Actually it's a simple matter for us to probe the minds of creatures like yourself.
Mind probing? Hypnosis?
You like to think of yourselves as complex creatures, but you're flawed. One gains admittance to your minds through many levels. You have too many to keep track of yourselves. There are unguarded entrances to any human mind.
Telepathy?
Not entirely, no. Telepathy doesn't imply control and I assure you that I have full control over your friends.
Don't move! (hands it to Spock) Cover them. Now, I want the rest of our weapons and our equipment. I want some answers.
Put that weapon down! Captain, it seems so foolish of you to insist on demonstrations. (She holds up a model Enterprise on a chain) In the mythology of your race this is called sympathetic magic. Jackson, the crew member who returned to the ship. You wondered what killed him. I made an image of him. In the essence of my thoughts the image was Jackson. And when I killed the image and knew that it was dead, he died.
You can't think a man to death.
Your communicator. (it appears on the table) Now, signal your ship.
Don't. Sylvia, don't.
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Come in.
Enterprise. From Captain Kirk. Come in.
Captain, are you all right? Where are you? Are the others all right, sir?
Never mind about us. What's happening up there?
The temperature, sir. It keeps rising. Reading, Mister.
It's up sixty degrees in the past thirty seconds. We're burning up, sir.
DeSalle, channel bypass power into your heat dissipation units.
We've already done it, Captain. It had no effect. We're cooking up here.
All right. I'll handle it down here. Kirk out. (taking the model from Sylvia and the phaser from Spock) You've won.
You can relax now, Captain. Your ship is safe.
Temperature is almost back to normal, dropping down fast.
Lieutenant, try to raise the captain again.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, please. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Acknowledge. We've lost him again, Mister DeSalle.
Captain, you've seen something of our science. Now tell us about yours.
You seem to be singing a different tune. I'd rather know more about yours. You call it magic, you call it science. It seems unrelated to both of them.
What would you name it, Captain?
I wouldn't attempt to name it, but you seem to do with your mind what we do with tools. You alter matter, move it about by telekinesis.
Yes, we can change the molecular structure
Korob, you talk too much.
You kept Scott and Sulu as catspaws to lure us down here. How'd you know we'd come?
Oh, we didn't have to know. They knew.
Enough of this! You will tell us what we want to know.
It's too late for threats. You let me contact the ship. How long do you think it will it be before a search party arrives?
Some time, Captain. Quite some time.
There will be no search party, Captain Kirk. An impenetrable force field around your ship, Captain. It will not hinder orbit, but your people are prisoners within it.
It's some kind of a force field, sir, but not like any other I've ever heard of before. It's not coming from anywhere. It's simply all around us.
I would advise you to co-operate, Captain. Forcible extraction of the information we wish from you is not complicated, but it is extremely painful and it has a certain draining effect.
We have nothing to discuss.
Take them to their cell. (gives the phaser to Scott)
Wait. The doctor will stay. Your turn will be next, Captain. It makes little difference. Take them out of here.
Wave length analysis, Mister Chekov?
It will not analyse, sir.
All right, but it's there and it's real. If it's real, it can be affected. Engineering, stand by to divert all power systems to the outer hull. Prepare impulse engines for generation of maximum heat directed as ordered. Maybe we can't break it, but I'll bet you credits to navy beans we can put a dent in it.
How long has it been?
Twenty two minutes, seventeen seconds.
Thanks. I wonder what they're doing to Doc.
I'm sure we'll find out shortly. Jim, all of these things that we've seen. To an Earthman like yourself, they must seem quite familiar.
Familiar. Startling. Not rational.
Precisely. I refer you to the psychological theory of the racial subconscious. The universal myths, symbols.
Ghosts, witches.
And dungeons and castles and black cats. They all belong to the twilight world of consciousness.
They tried to tap our conscious mind.
And they missed. They reached basically only the subconscious. Korob seemed puzzled by your reaction to the environment he'd provided.
He expected me to react as though it were all normal. Well, he admitted that they weren't native to this planet.
And not to have a knowledge of our scientific methods is most unlikely for any life form we've met in this galaxy.
They refer to us as creatures, as though we were some species that they were unfamiliar with. If we're creatures, I wonder what they're really like.
Evidently something totally alien in all respects.
Agreed. Totally alien. And I don't like hostile strangers showing such an acute interest in our galaxy, our world, Spock. Not at all like friendly visitors. We're going to have to stop them, cold. But at the moment
I, too, am at a loss at this time to suggest a course of action.
Oh, Bones. Doc.
You forget what we were sent here for.
I forget nothing. I'm not a puppet, Korob, like you.
You're a traitor.
You are a fool. We have nothing like this and I like it. To touch, to feel to understand the idea of luxury I like it. And I don't intend to leave it.
We have a duty to the old ones.
What do they know of sensations? This is a new world.
You're cruel. You torture our specimens.
And that, too, is a new sensation. I find it stimulating.
You're wrong! You're discarding everything we live by.
I live by my own decisions. You're a weak fool, Korob.
I have the power.
But you're afraid to use it. Don't threaten me. I can squash you and that would be an interesting sensation, yes. I find I like these new sensations. Don't try to push me.
Captain. It's time for our talk. Korob, leave us alone and take these men with you.
This is not ended, Sylvia.
But it may end soon, old man.
What now? You wave your magic wand and destroy my mind, too?
There's no real damage to the mind, Captain, simply a drain of knowledge and will.
You don't call that damage?
Why should I?
You'd know if you had compassion. A woman should have compassion, but I forget you're not a woman.
But you're mistaken, Captain. I am a woman now. I come from a world without sensation as you and I now know it. It excites me. I want more.
You seem to need us. Why?
Because you have knowledge which I lack. but were our abilities put together. Tell me about power, Captain. How does it feel?
What about Korob?
He is a fool. I'll do without him. But you? Why do I find you different? Why would it be so difficult to dispose of you?
Why don't you simply probe my mind and get what you want?
No, not that, not for you. What I want is a joining. My mind to yours willingly. Think of the secrets you could learn. Think of the power that would be yours. Anything you can imagine, I can give you.
You're very persuasive. What happens if I go along?
Then everything would be ours together. I've never conceived of the idea of togetherness before. It excites me. You excite me. Why?
For the same reasons you excite me. You're a very beautiful woman.
You find me beautiful? But I can be many women. (now she's blonde teen jail-bait) You like what you see. (a platinum blonde in a loose cat-suit) or do you prefer me as I was?
You have a knack for giving me difficult choices. (kisses her again) You have nothing like that where you come from?
Nothing.
Your people, when they come here
They're like, like feathers in the wind without the transmuter.
(nuzzling her neck) Transmuter?
The source. You will learn. I will teach you later. Later.
Then it's a device. You do use tools.
It gives only form. You're teaching me substance.
You haven't changed your mind? You won't return home?
My home is here with you. A billion worlds of sensation to pick and choose.
You are using me. You hold me in your arms and there is no fire in your mind. You're trying to deceive me! It's here, (the crystal) like words on a page. You are using me.
And why not? You've been using me and my crew.
You will be swept away. You, your men, your ship, your worlds!
I don't see any change.
It's there, Lieutenant.
It was that electrical field we set up, Mister DeSalle, that dent you wanted. It's not much, but it is a start.
Keep it up, Mister Chekov. Channel the entire output of reactors one, two, and three into the relay stations. Whatever it is, it's starting to weaken.
I've released the model of your ship from the crystal, although they would have freed themselves soon. It's difficult to control so many things in so little time. (hands over phaser and communicator) Here. You must go before she finds the weapon is missing.
I'm not leaving without my men.
They're not your men anymore. They belong to Sylvia. I can no longer control them or her. She's irrational. The strain of adopting to your form, the insatiable desire for sensation and experience. She's a great danger and it was not necessary. We could have entered your galaxy in peace.
You came in a ship?
We used the transmuter.
Transmuter. Yes, she mentioned that.
There's no time to explain now. She means to destroy us all. There might still be a chance. Quickly. Come.
Fascinating.
Why a cat?
Racial memories. The cat is the most ruthless, most terrifying of animals, as far back as the sabre-toothed tiger.
I think I can stop her.
You'd better let us. (draws the phaser) It's out of energy. She must have drained it. We could have jumped Scott and Sulu at any time. We didn't know. No way out.
It's my problem. She's one of my kind. Come quickly.
Do you think you can make it?
Ready when you are, Captain.
(to Korob) Get ready.
No! Get back. Get back. Get back! Get back!
Korob, that door won't last.
Get back!
Go. Go! (He dies, and Kirk picks up his wand.)
Quickly, Captain.
Korob seemed to think this was important. Said something about a transmuter.
Captain, a bit more alacrity, if you please.
Captain.
Doc.
Jim!
Well, at least we found them.
Fortuitous, Captain. And now that we have them all together? (the cat arrives) A most unpleasant situation, Captain. If only your phaser had some power.
Maybe we do. (he gets the wand) Sylvia, I have the transmuter. It's mine now.
You're very clever, Captain. More so than I'd imagined. Clever, resourceful and handsome.
Don't let her touch the wand, Captain.
Jim!
Don't you get tired of these games?
I've never played games. Give it to me.
I wasn't sure before, but I am now. This is the source of your power, isn't it. The transmuter.
No, not the source. It's merely an amplifier. The mind is the source. Mine is simple, but yours has the key but you don't know how to use it.
I catch on quickly.
It is not too late, Captain James Kirk. Come with me. I'll teach you. You'll teach me.
Why? Because your people have nothing of your own? Is that why you need us?
We need your dreams, your ambition. With them, I can build. Give me the transmuter.
No.
You fool. Don't you know what you're giving up? Everything that your species finds desirable. Look at me. I am a woman. I am all women.
I don't know what you are but you're not a woman. You've tortured my men and taken their minds from them. You ask for love and return pain instead.
(holding a phaser) Korob was wrong. I didn't destroy all your weapons. Give me the transmuter. Give it to me!
What happened, Jim?
That'll take some explaining, Bones.
Everything's vanished.
Not everything.
Korob and Sylvia as they really are. Their forms were an illusion, just like the castle and everything else. Only the power pack gave them reality.
Fascinating. A life form totally alien to our galaxy. If we could preserve and study this
Too late. All of this, just an illusion.
No illusion. Jackson is dead. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Standing by, Captain.
Five to beam up.
I, Mudd
Good morning, sir, Doctor.
Something wrong?
Yes. There's something odd about that man, and I can't quite pinpoint it.
Perhaps you're making a rather hasty judgment. Mister Norman has only been aboard seventy two hours.
I know when something doesn't strike me right, and he doesn't.
Specifics, Doctor. Labels do not make arguments.
All right. There's something wrong about a man who never smiles, whose conversation never varies from the routine of the job, and who won't talk about his background.
I see.
Spock, I mean that it's odd for a non-Vulcan. The ears make all the difference.
I find your argument strewn with gaping defects in logic.
Maybe, but you can't evaluate a man by logic alone. Besides, he has avoided two appointments that I've made for his physical exam without reason.
That's not at all surprising, Doctor. He's probably terrified of your beads and rattles.
Yes, Mister Sulu?
There's an unplanned course change being fed into the instruments, sir.
Correct it.
I can't, sir.
Auxiliary control, this is the captain. Auxiliary control, what's going on down there?
Sir, auxiliary control is on total override.
Kirk to Security.
Security. Lieutenant Rowe here, sir.
Intruder alert, deck eight, auxiliary control.
Acknowledged.
Lieutenant Uhura, have Mister Spock report to the bridge.
Aye, sir.
What's the imposed course, Mister Sulu?
Turning on three oh seven degrees, mark eight. Being executed now, sir.
Take care of him.
Security to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Lieutenant Rowe, sir. I'm in auxiliary control. Ensign Jordan's been knocked out.
The directional master controls have been jammed. They're totally unworkable.
Any sign of the intruder?
No, sir. He's gone. I've put out a full security alert on all decks.
Find him. Kirk out. Mister Spock, we seem to be taking an unscheduled ride.
Interesting.
Mister Sulu, cut in emergency manual monitor. I want the override broken.
Sir, the instruments won't respond.
Emergency manual monitor, report.
This is Captain Kirk. Acknowledge.
Emergency manual monitor, this is the captain. Report.
Here, you're not allowed
Acknowledge. This is the captain. Scotty, acknowledge. Scotty, what's going on down there?
Kirk to Engineering.
This is the captain. Scotty, report.
Scotty, the intruder is in your area.
What's going on down there? Scotty!
Captain, he's here.
Scotty.
Scotty.
Scotty? Security, the intruder is in the engineering section. Have all units converge on that point.
Sir, we're picking up speed. Warp five, six. Warp seven, sir.
Cut power.
I can't, sir. All the controls are jammed.
Spock, take over.
It will not be necessary, Captain.
Tell Security we've found the intruder. Do you mind telling me what this is all about, mister?
I am in total control of your ship. I have connected the matter-antimatter pods to the main navigational bank. A trigger relay is now in operation. Any attempts to alter course will result in immediate destruction of this vessel.
Spock?
Confirmed, Captain. He's taken out all the override controls. If we tamper without knowing where the trigger relay is, we could extinguish ourselves.
Who are you?
I assure you we are no threat to humanity or humanoid life. We mean you no harm, but we require your ship.
You require? Who and what are we?
An android.
And most sophisticated.
I control the trigger relay, sir. I cannot be overcome by physical means, and if you attempt to use your phasers, the trigger relay will be activated. We shall continue on our present course for approximately four solar days, at which time we shall arrive at our destination.
Who sent you?
I am not programmed to respond in that area.
(attempting a mind meld) He simply appears to have turned himself off, Captain. And since we cannot repair the damage he has done without destroying the ship
It seems we're going to take a little trip.
Captain Kirk. The following individuals will be transported down to our planet. Yourself, science officer, medical officer, communications officer and navigator.
Any meetings or discussions can be held aboard the Enterprise.
If you do not come with me, your engines will be destroyed and you will remain in orbit here forever.
I must say that's a gracious invitation.
There is a word. Among us there is no corresponding meaning, but it seems to mean something to you humans.
And what is that word?
Please.
Our planet's surface is what you classify as K-type, adaptable for humans by use of pressure domes and life-support systems. (to one of two identical women standing by a doorway.) I have brought them.
I don't believe it.
Welcome aboard, Kirk. It's been a long time, eh?
Harry Mudd.
Well, to be absolutely accurate, laddybuck, you should refer to me as Mudd the First, ruler of this entire sovereign planet.
Ruler? Harry, I want control of my ship returned immediately. We have no intention of staying as your guests.
Well, I'm afraid there's a bit of a problem there.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Alice.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Now, now, now, now, Jamie boy, let's have no unauthorised communications.
You know this man, Captain?
Oh, do I know him. Harcourt Fenton Mudd, thief
Come now.
Swindler and con man
Entrepreneur.
Liar and rogue.
Did I leave you with that impression?
He belongs in jail, which is where I thought I left you, Mudd.
And thereby hangs a tale, yes. But look around you, Kirk. Quite a place, isn't it? I hope you're all going to enjoy it.
Mudd, I want that trained machine of yours, Norman, to deactivate the trigger mechanism and free my ship.
I shall do that, Kirk, when I'm ready.
I'm telling you now.
And I do the telling on this planet, Kirk, old boy. You do the listening.
All right, I'll listen. What are you telling?
Merely that you might as well start enjoying yourselves. It's really a very, very nice place, and you're all going to be here quite probably for the rest of your lives. (laughs)
Harry Mudd, you're a liar and an outlaw and in deep trouble. I want navigational control restored, my ship released.
Sorry. That'd be against the law. My law. Decreed by Mudd the First. Voted in by the resident population. Lovely, aren't they? You must admit, Kirk, that I still retain my eye for beauty. I decreed that I should always be surrounded by it, and my decrees always come to pass. I've had five hundred of them made up to attend me. All of them identical, beautiful, compliant, obedient.
Five hundred of the same model? That seems rather redundant.
I have a fondness for this particular model, Mister Spock, which you, unfortunately, are ill-equipped to appreciate.
All right, Harry, explain. How did you get here? We left you in custody after that affair on the Rigel mining planet.
Yes, well, I organised a technical information service bringing modern industrial techniques to backward planets, making available certain valuable patents to struggling young civilisations throughout the galaxy.
Did you pay royalties to the owners of those patents?
Well, actually, Kirk, as a defender of the free enterprise system, I found myself in a rather ambiguous conflict as a matter of principle.
He did not pay royalties.
Knowledge, sir, should be free to all.
Who caught you?
That, sir, is an outrageous assumption.
Yes. Who caught you?
I sold the Denebians all the rights to a Vulcan fuel synthesiser.
And the Denebians contacted the Vulcans.
How'd you know?
That's what I would have done.
It's typical police mentality. They've got no sense of humour. They arrested me.
Oh, I find that shocking.
Worse than that. Do know what the penalty for fraud is on Deneb Five?
The guilty party has his choice. Death by electrocution, death by gas, death by phaser, death by hanging.
The key word in your entire peroration, Mister Spock, was, death. Barbarians. Well, of course, I left.
He broke jail.
I borrowed transportation.
He stole a spaceship.
The patrol reacted in a hostile manner.
They fired at him.
They've no respect for private property. They damaged the bloody spaceship. Well, I got away, but I couldn't navigate, so I wandered out through unmapped space, and here I found Mudd.
You went to substantial risk and effort to bring a starship here. Logically, you must have a compelling motive.
Spock, you're going to love it here. They all talk just the way you do.
Go on, get on with it, Harry.
Yes, well, right, laddybuck. So here I am in a planet with over two hundred thousand hard-working, happy androids, all of whom exist merely to serve my every whim. It's absolute paradise.
Then I'm unable to discern your problem.
They won't let me go. They want to study me. They want to learn more about human beings.
They picked a fine representative.
Watch your tongue, lad. You're talking about Mudd the First. Well, anyway, I ran out of ideas. I simply ran out of things for them to do, and they insisted that I bring them more human beings. They need human beings to serve, to study. So I had to promise them a prime sample. A starship captain. Bright, loyal, fearless and imaginative. Any captain would have done. I was lucky to get you. So you are going to take over for me here, and I can get off this rock and back to civilisation.
I think not, Harry.
You misunderstand me, lad. I'm not asking you. I'm telling you. You've no choice. Show them to their quarters.
(noticing a curtained alcove) Harry, what's this?
Ah. That, gentlemen, is a shrine to the memory of my beloved Stella.
Who?
Stella, my wife.
Dead?
Oh, no, no, no. Merely deserted. You see, gentlemen, behind every great man there is a woman urging him on. And so it was with my Stella. She urged me on into outer space. Not that she meant to, but with her continual, eternal, confounded nagging. Well, I think of her constantly, and every time I do, I go further out into space.
That's very interesting. You leave your wife and then bring her along.
I had the androids construct a perfect replica of Stella so that I could gaze upon her and rejoice in her absence. Gentlemen, attend. Stella, dear.
Harcourt. Harcourt Fenton Mudd, what have you been up to? Nothing good, I'm sure. Well, let me tell you, you lazy, good-for-nothing
Shut up.
Nothing, thing, thing,
Marvellous, isn't it? I finally have the last word with her, and with you.
You'll find this quite comfortable. Your quarters are down the hall.
Yes. My ship.
Norman, who created you?
The makers designed us. They came from the galaxy of Andromeda.
Then your makers weren't humanoid?
They were, as you say, quite humanoid, but, unlike your civilisation, robots were common. We performed the necessary service functions and freed our makers to evolve a perfect social order.
What became of them?
Our home planet's sun became a nova. Only a few exploratory outposts survived. This unit, myself, was part of one such outpost in your galaxy.
Then some of your makers survive.
No, Captain. They died over the stretch of time.
Whom do you serve now?
We serve Harry Mudd.
We lacked it for a long time. (he leaves)
You are free to visit them.
All right. We might later. In the meantime, would you mind leaving us?
Why should we leave you?
Because we don't like you. Now. (shooing away gesture)
Well, opinions?
I think we're in a lot of trouble.
That's a great help, Mister Chekov. Bones?
I think Mister Chekov's right. We are in a lot of trouble.
Spock. And if you say we're in a lot of trouble.
We are, and we must direct our attack to the heart of the matter. Obviously this many androids cannot operate independently. There must be a central control system which guides the entire android population.
Try and find it. The rest of you, look around, learn everything you can. I'll see what else I can find out from Mister Mudd. Let's go.
I trust you are enjoying yourself, Mister Spock.
Very interesting. Very interesting. This is a most unusual device.
It is our central control complex.
Did I understand there are more than two hundred thousand of you?
Two hundred and seven thousand, eight hundred and nine.
This would seem to be a simple relay centre. Are all of you controlled through this device?
(his number 1 collar flashes) I am not programmed to respond in this area.
Oh, that's quite understandable.
Very impressive.
I should say so.
I must say, I like the styling.
They were, of course, made to my personal specifications, as indeed were the Maisie series, the Trudie series, and particularly the Annabel series.
Don't you believe in male androids, Harry?
Male? Well, I suppose they have their uses.
How long does a body like that last?
Five hundred thousand years?
Immortality and eternal beauty.
Captain, I've just had a most fascinating meeting with Norman, and I'm convinced I've discovered a very important inconsistency.
I'm so glad you enjoyed it, Doctor.
Jim, you should see the research facilities. They've got a lab down there that. Well, I could spend the rest of my life studying it.
I do so admire a man who devotes himself to knowledge.
Don't lose your head, Bones. Nobody's staying anywhere.
Stubborn, Kirk. Stubborn.
I wouldn't be bored, I can tell you that.
Let go of me! Now what are you doing? What kind of a woman
Splendid. Splendid. Welcome to Mudd, Mister Scott.
Harry Mudd! Oh, you bogus frat, you. You're the cause of all this, are you?
Scotty, you were ordered to stay aboard.
Aye, sir. And I stayed until that female gargantua threw me into the transporter beams.
What does she mean, the last one?
Didn't I tell you, Kirk? I beamed a few dozen androids up to your ship. They've been sending your crew to the surface for the past couple of hours. They're all down now.
Are you out of your mind? (grabs Mudd by the throat) You can't beam down an entire crew of a spaceship. Somebody has to be on board.
There is an entire crew aboard. An entire crew of androids. They learn very quickly, Captain. The fact is, I've taken over your whole ship. There's nothing you can do about it.
Harry, Harry, you'll never get away with it.
Well, who's to stop me?
Starfleet.
But now, Captain, now I have a ship of my own as fast as any in the fleet, so how will they catch me, eh? Just think of it, laddybuck. Harry Mudd with his own crew of lovelies aboard your vessel. Think about that.
I'm trying not to.
Alice.
He could successfully accomplish it, Captain. I've questioned a number of the androids, and they're totally loyal to Mudd. Perhaps of more concern is the fact that this android population can literally provide anything a human being could ask for in unlimited quantity.
Yes, I know. That's what worries me. How will my crew react in a world where they can have everything they want simply by asking for it.
You desire something, lord?
Oh, yes, thank you. (they pour him a cup of wine) You're Alice
And you're Alice
Oh, well, it doesn't make much difference. You're both lovely.
Thank you, my lord.
What a shame you're not real.
Oh, I mean real girls.
You are?
Yes, my lord.
Harry Mudd programmed you?
Yes, my lord.
That unprincipled, evil-minded, lecherous kulak Harry Mudd programmed you?
Yes, my lord.
This place is even better than Leningrad.
Absolutely fantastic. Hand-worked to the finest tolerances, microvision, and a nanopulse laser. I've never seen the like before.
You may command us to make anything for you, or do the work yourself for pleasure. You may have the services of any number of craftsmen, exclusive use of the computer facilities. Anything.
Captain, you should see this shop! Why, they have facilities we've never even thought of.
Is that the way you're going to do it, Mudd? Hit my people at their weakest point?
We only wish to make you happy and comfortable, Captain. If we are to serve your kind, we must understand you. Our Lord, Harry Mudd was only one example for us. Now we are learning a great deal from all of you.
All right, here we are, birds in a gilded cage. The question is, how do we get out of here?
I don't know, sir, but it's a very nice gilded cage.
And it is a very pleasant place, Captain.
What did they offer you, Uhura?
Oh, nothing really important. Just immortality.
All right. We're getting back to the ship, and don't you forget it. Straighten up! This may be a gilded cage filled with everything you always wanted, but it's still a cage. We don't belong here. We belong on that ship up there.
No. Yes. My ship.
Yes, I know.
Alice, give us back our ship to please us. Return us to our ship because we desire it.
But we're unhappy here.
Unhappiness is the state which occurs in the human when wants and desires are not fulfilled.
We want the Enterprise.
No, it's a beautiful lady, and we love her.
Interesting.
Fascinating.
Bones, have you had time to take any psychological readings of the androids?
I did. And you can forget it. They're perfect, flawless, mentally and physically. No weaknesses, perfectly disciplined. No vices, no fears, no faults. Just a sense of purpose. Believe me, there's nothing tougher to overcome, even among humans.
Yes. That's what this crew needs, a little sense of purpose.
Mudd, a few questions I want to ask you.
Afraid I won't have time to answer them. My bags are all packed. The androids will take the Enterprise out of orbit in less than twenty four hours. But it's been a real pleasure having you here, Kirk. Is there anything I can get for you?
Yes. My ship.
You're a stubborn fellow, aren't you? But I don't mind. I don't mind that at all. Because I'll be leaving here quickly enough, and then you can be stubborn at your own leisure. One last time. Stella, dear.
Harcourt Fenton Mudd, where have you been? What have you been up to? Have you been drinking again, you miserable sot! You good-for-nothing
Shut up!
Thing, thing, thing.
Alice Number 2, my little love. Will you have my bags transported up to the ship?
What?
We can no longer take your orders, Harry Mudd.
Why not?
Our makers were wise. They programmed us to serve.
Yes, but that's what I'm saying. Put my bags on the ship.
Harry, I think they have something else in mind.
You are correct, Captain. Harry Mudd is flawed, even for a human being. We recognised this from the beginning but used his knowledge to obtain more specimens. Your species is self-destructive. You need our help.
We prefer to help ourselves. We make mistakes, but we're human. And maybe that's the word that best explains us.
We will not harm you, but we will take the starship, and you will remain on this planet.
Now, look here. You can't do that! Now, listen. To serve us, you must obey us.
Alice number One, obey me. Put my bags on that ship!
We cannot allow any race as greedy and corruptible as yours to have free run of the galaxy.
I'm curious, Norman. Just how do you intend to stop them?
We shall serve them. Their kind will be eager to accept our service. Soon they will become completely dependent upon us.
We shall take care of them.
Eminently practical.
The whole galaxy controlled by your kind?
Yes, Captain. And we shall serve them and you will be happy, and controlled.
So far this thing has had its amusing aspects, but that threat the androids made about taking over all the humans in the galaxy is not very funny.
Indeed, it is not. They may quite possibly be able to accomplish it.
Take my word for it, they can.
Whatever method we use to stop them, we must make haste. They have only to install some cybernetic devices aboard the Enterprise and they'll be able to leave orbit.
How do you know so much?
I asked them.
Oh.
Why shouldn't they answer our questions? They don't think we can do anything to stop them.
You're so smart, Kirk, you and this pointy-eared thinking machine of yours. Well, you'd better do something because I'm as anxious to get off this ruddy rock as you are.
You wanted to leave us on this ruddy rock and leave by yourself.
Oh, yes.
All right, what have we got to work with?
Well, Captain, androids and robots, they're just not capable of independent, creative thought.
Yet the device that Norman claims to be their central control is totally inadequate to the task of directing more than two hundred thousand of them.
I agree. What in your opinion does direct them?
There are a large number of Alices and Trudies, Maisies, Annabels, and according to my research, a Herman series, an Oscar series, a whole plethora of series in fact. But only one Norman.
Norman. When I told one of the Alices that the Enterprise was a lovely lady and we loved her, she said, Norman, co-ordinate. Why Norman? Unless
To function as they do, each android mind must be one component of a mass brain linked through a central locus.
Named Norman. Forming one gigantic, highly intelligent mind. And the glowing badges, they indicate the mind in operation.
That would seem logical.
Yes, logical. That's what it is. And that in turn gives us a weapon that we can use against them. We must use wild, insane, irrational illogic aimed right at Norman!
Captain, you sing and dance as well as anyone I've ever seen, but what the devil are you talking about?
What would seem to be a sound, and perhaps our only, opportunity.
Opportunity? Now, listen, Spock, you may be a wonderful science officer, but believe me, you couldn't sell fake patents to your mother.
I fail to understand why I should care to induce my mother to purchase falsified patents.
Forget it.
Let's get to the point. Harry, you said you wanted to help. Do you?
Captain, the kind of a wholesome, antiseptic galaxy that these androids would run would be purgatory for a man like me.
That's fine, Harry. The androids will be expecting us to make a break for it, and that's where you come in.
What can I do?
Nothing, Harry. Just go to sleep.
What do you mean? (McCoy produces a hypo) Oh, now, now wait a minute, gentlemen. No, what I, I, (gets injected) had in mind was actually more in the line of a few words of sage counsel as it were. Advice (passes out in Kirk and Scott's arms)
Oh, Harry. I do believe you're putting on weight.
We have a medical problem. Your ex-Lord, Harry Mudd.
We are caring for him, but our doctor needs his medical equipment aboard the Enterprise.
You are programmed to serve. If we're not allowed access to our medical equipment, Harry Mudd will die. He will cease to function. You will have failed to serve.
He is dying.
Oh, yes.
No, they're lying. It's a trick. Doctor McCoy injected something into Harry Mudd to make him look sick. It's a trick to get back on board and sabotage the ship.
Uhura, why did you tell her?
Because I want an android body. I want immortality. I'll live forever, Captain. I'll be young and beautiful.
Thank you.
Uhura. Beautiful!
I half believed it myself.
What's next, Captain?
Next, we take the Alices on a trip through Wonderland.
Yes. Your attention.
They're celebrating.
Their captivity. Do you enjoy the music?
Thank you, gentlemen. Thank you, lovely lady. You dance divinely.
Thank you, kind sir. (her slap knocks him off his feet.)
She likes him. Mister Chekov. The floor is no place for an officer. Attention! Now stand absolutely still.
Yes, Captain. (and goes into an energetic Cossack dance)
That's better, Mister Chekov.
Your statement is illogical.
How does it look?
Completely inner directed. Oblivious to everything.
Good. I wonder how Spock's doing.
Of course. Your computations would inevitably lead to a total description of the parabolic intersection of dimension with dimension.
Thank you.
I love you. However, I hate you.
Yes, of course. That is exactly why I hate you. Because you are identical.
Fascinating.
All right, it's worked so far, but we're not out yet.
Well?
Success, Captain. We've been pruning the leaves and branches of the tree. Now it is time to get to work on the root.
If Norman is the control centre, he should be in a bind by what we've done. If we can overload him further, we should be able to immobilise all of them. Does everybody remember what to do?
Affirmative.
Aye, sir.
Acknowledged.
What are you doing here?
I want you to surrender.
That is illogical. We can move more quickly than you. We are invulnerable to attack. We are much stronger.
No, we are stronger. I'll prove it to you. Can you harm a man that you're programmed to serve?
No.
But you already have, Norman, laddy. Human beings do not survive on bread alone, you poor soulless creature, but on the nourishments of liberty, for what indeed is a man without freedom? Naught but a mechanism trapped in the cogwheels of eternity.
(in a monotone) You offer us only well-being.
(in a monotone) Food and drink and happiness mean nothing to us. We must be about our job.
Suffering, in torment and pain. Labouring without end.
Dying and crying and lamenting over our burdens.
Only this way can we be happy.
That is contradictory. It is not logical. Mister Spock. Explain.
Why not?
Logic is a little tweeting bird chirping in a meadow. Logic is a wreath of pretty flowers which smell bad. Are you sure your circuits are registering correctly? Your ears are green.
(clutching at his heart and crying out in anguish) I canna go on! I'm tired of happiness. I'm tired of comfort and pleasure. I'm ready! Kill me! Kill me!
Goodbye, cruel universe.
He's dead.
You cannot have killed him. You have no weapons.
Scotty. Scotty's dead. He had too much happiness. But now he's happier he's dead, and we'll miss him. Let us hear it for our poor, dead friend.
What is a man but that lofty spirit, that sense of enterprise, that devotion to something that cannot be sensed, cannot be realised but only dreamed! The highest reality.
Brilliant! Bravo, bravo, Captain!
How did you like it?
That is irrational. Illogical. Dreams are not real.
Our logic is to be illogical. That is our advantage. Mister Spock, it is time. The explosive.
Very well, Captain.
Explosive! (gets up again)
Don't panic. Women and children first.
I believe that is the correct amount, Captain. Mister Mudd, are you ready?
Aye, aye! (adopts a catchers pose)
Be careful. I would not want you to drop it.
Easy now. Oh, he's caught it!
Watch it! Watch it!
(to McCoy) Detonator. Fuse. Primer. Mashie.
There is no explosive.
No? Observe. Fore! (Mudd swings.) Boom!
Are you all right?
But there was no explosion.
I lied.
What?
He lied. Everything Harry tells you is a lie. Remember that. Everything Harry tells you is a lie.
Listen to this carefully, Norman. I am lying.
You say you are lying, but if everything you say is a lie then you are telling the truth, but you cannot tell the truth because everything you say is a lie. You lie. You tell the truth. But you cannot for. Illogical! Illogical! Please explain.
You are human. Only humans can explain their behaviour. Please explain.
I am not programmed to respond in that area.
I believe they are all immobilised, Captain.
Good.
Kirk, old man, I'm beginning to develop considerable respect for you.
Why, thank you.
Would you consider entering a partnership arrangement with me? I've got some ideas.
A partnership arrangement? You and me?
Yes.
I've got something else in mind. Let's go.
Well, you must be very unhappy, Mister Spock.
That is a human emotion, Doctor, with which I am totally unfamiliar. How could I be unhappy?
Well, we found a whole world of minds that work just like yours. Logical, unemotional, completely pragmatic. And we poor, irrational humans whipped them in a fair fight. Now you'll find yourself back among us illogical humans again.
Which I find eminently satisfactory, Doctor, for nowhere am I so desperately needed as among a shipload of illogical humans.
Touch, Bones.
I've never heard of anything so revolting. We'll soon get to the bottom of this.
Kirk, now what's this I hear about my having to stay here?
Yes, Mudd, you've been paroled to the android population of this planet.
The androids are being reprogrammed. Their original purpose was to adapt this planet for productive use. They'll begin that work again.
But what do I do? Kirk, I'm no scientist.
No, you're an irritant. You'll stay here and provide a first-class example to the androids of a human failure. They'll learn by close observation how to avoid ones like you in the future.
How long?
As long as you continue to be an irritant, Harry. It's up to you.
I suppose that taking everything into consideration, as it were, and noting all the different possibilities, I could manage. And as detention sentences go, this one isn't too uncomfortable. And I'm back in the galaxy again!
Yes, you are. Oh, there's one more thing, Harry. We've programmed a special android attendant to take care of your every need. She'll help you find an incentive to work with the androids and not exploit them.
I call that unexpectedly civil of you, Captain.
Yes.
Shut up!
You miserable, conniving toad!
I order you. Shut up, Stella!
Kirk, you can't do this.
It's inhuman.
No. Number five hundred? No, no, no.
(barely heard over the cacophony) Kirk. It's inhuman. Mercy.
Goodbye, Harry. Have fun.
Metamorphosis
We have reached projected point three, Captain. Adjust to new course two oh one mark one five.
Thank you, Mister Spock.
(offering a drink) Jim.
How is she, Doc?
No change.
Small thanks to the Starfleet.
Now really, Commissioner, you can't blame the Starfleet.
I should've received the proper inoculations ahead of time.
Sakuro's disease is extremely rare. The chances of anyone contracting it are literally billions to one.
I was sent to Epsilon Canaris Three to prevent a war, Doctor. Thanks to the inefficiency of the medical branch of the Starfleet, I've been forced to leave before my job was done.
Commissioner, I can assure you that once we reach the Enterprise, with its medical facilities, we'll have you back to your job in time for you to prevent that war.
How soon will we rendezvous with that ship of yours, Captain?
In exactly four hours, twenty one minutes, Commissioner.
Captain.
Yes?
Will you check your automatic scanner, please?
That's odd. I've never seen anything like that before.
Nor have I.
Heading directly toward us at warp speed.
Staying right with us. Sensor readings, Mister Spock.
Vaguely like a cloud of ionised hydrogen, but with strong erratic electrical impulses.
We've got it.
Helm does not answer, Captain.
Neither do the pods. Communications are dead. Building overload. Cut all power relays.
Cut, Captain.
What's happening? I demand to know.
You already know as much as we do, Miss Hedford. Whatever that thing is outside, it's yanked us off course from the Enterprise.
Now on course nine eight mark one two, heading directly toward Gamma Canaris region.
Jim, we've got to get Miss Hedford to the Enterprise. Her condition.
I know, Bones, but there's nothing I can do about it.
I insist you make your scheduled rendezvous with the Enterprise.
Miss Hedford, we'll do what we can, when we can. At the moment, we're helpless. You might as well sit back and enjoy the ride.
Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please, come in. Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please. It's no good. We're not transmitting. Bones?
Oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere. Some krypton, argon, neon. Temperature seventy five degrees Fahrenheit. Practically identical to Earth atmosphere.
Spock?
Gravity is similar to Earth. Most unusual in view of its size. The bulk of the body seems to be iron and nickel. More than an asteroid. Like a small planetoid, I should say. Possibly a remnant of a planet breakup. Totally suitable for human life.
All right, we get out and get up. Issue phasers. Bones, maintain full alert. Commissioner, you'll stay inside.
Just how long am I supposed to stay inside, Captain?
That's a very good question. I wish I could answer it. All right. Let's go.
Take a look around, Bones.
Most unusual. Unlikely. In fact, Captain, I would say quite impossible.
Nothing wrong and nothing works.
Precisely.
There must be a reason.
Obviously.
Let's look a little further.
Jim, I just took a tricording sweep, and I got the same readings almost as Spock got when we were pulled off course.
The ionised cloud.
I think so, only it reads here on the surface with us. It's in that direction, and it doesn't read solid. It's more unstable, tenuous, like a collection of gases.
Hello! Hello!
Fascinating.
Bones, get a physiological reading on that, whatever it is.
Hello! Are you real? I mean, I'm not imagining you, am I?
We're real enough.
You speak English. Earth people?
From the Federation.
The F? Well, it doesn't matter. I'm Cochrane. I've been marooned here who knows how long. If you only knew how good it is to see you. And a woman. A beautiful one at that.
I'm Captain James T. Kirk, commanding the starship Enterprise. (they shake hands) This is my first officer Mister Spock.
You're a Vulcan, aren't you?
Correct.
Chief Surgeon Leonard McCoy.
Doctor.
Pleasure.
Oh, and excuse me, Assistant Federation Commissioner Hedford.
Ma'am. You're food to a starving man. All of you. Hey, that's a nice ship. Simple and clean. Been trying to get her to go again? Well, forget it. It won't work.
He's human, Jim. Everything checks out perfectly.
Mister Cochrane. We were forced off our course and taken here by some force we couldn't identify.
Which seems to be on the surface of this body at the moment.
Well, I wouldn't know anything about that.
You say we'll be unable to get the ship to function again?
Not a chance. There's some sort of dampening field down here. Power systems don't work. Take my word for it.
You don't mind if we continue to try?
Go right ahead. You've got plenty of time.
What about you, Cochrane? How did you get here?
Marooned, I told you. Look, we'll have lots of time to learn about each other. I have a small place over that way. All the comforts of home. I can even offer you a hot bath.
How perceptive of you to notice I needed one.
If you don't mind, Mister Cochrane, I'd like more than just a statement that you were marooned here. It's a long way off the beaten path.
That's right. That's why I'm so glad to see you. Look, I'll tell you everything you want to know, but not here. Your ship is sure a beauty.
Yes, she is. And you've been out of circulation quite a while. The principles may be new to you. Mister Spock, why don't you explain our methods of propulsion to Mister Cochrane?
Talks a lot, but he doesn't say much.
I've noticed something else.
What's that?
He looks familiar.
Familiar? Now that you mention it, he does.
I can't quite place him, but. What about Miss Hedford?
No temperature yet, but we've got to get under way soon, Jim. I guarantee you, it will develop. What are we going to do?
Take Cochrane up on his offer.
You built this, Mister Cochrane?
Yes. I had tools and supplies left over from my crash.
Not bad.
Not Earth, but it's livable. I grow vegetables in the fields over that next ridge. Come on in.
All the comforts of home indeed, Mister Cochrane. Where'd you get the antiques?
You mean my instruments? I imagine things have changed a lot since I crashed.
Not that much.
Must you keep it so terribly hot in here?
The temperature's a constant seventy two degrees. Let me get you something cool to drink.
Do you feel hot?
I feel infuriated, deeply put upon, and absolutely outraged.
It was quite a hike here. You're tired. Just take it easy for a while.
I'll rest later, Doctor.
Temperature, Captain. First sign.
Yes, I know. It means we're running out of time.
Captain, Doctor.
What was that?
Well, sometimes the light plays tricks on you. You'd be surprised what I've imagined I've seen around here sometimes.
We imagined nothing, Mister Cochrane. There was an entity out there and I suspect it was the same entity which brought us here. Please explain.
There's nothing to explain.
Thank you.
You'll find I have a very low tolerance level where the safety of my people are concerned. We find you out here, where no human has any business being. We were virtually hijacked in space and brought here. Now I'm not just requesting an explanation, Mister. I'm demanding one.
All right. It was the Companion.
The what?
That's what I call it. As a matter of fact, Captain, I didn't crash here. I was brought here in my disabled ship. I was almost dead. The Companion saved my life.
You were injured?
I was dying, Mister Spock.
You seem perfectly all right now. What was the matter?
I was an old man.
You were what?
Well, I don't know how it did it, but the Companion rejuvenated me, made me young again, like I am now.
I prefer to reserve judgment on that part of your story, sir. Meanwhile, would you please explain exactly what this Companion of yours is?
I told you, I don't know what it is. It exists, it lives, and I can communicate with it.
That's a pretty far out story.
Mister Cochrane, do you have a first name?
Zefram.
Zefram Cochrane of Alpha Centuri, the discoverer of the space warp?
That's right, Captain.
But that's impossible. Zefram Cochrane died a hundred and fifty years ago.
The name of Zefram Cochrane is revered throughout the known galaxy. Planets were named after him. Great universities, cities.
Isn't your story a little improbable, Mister Cochrane?
No, it's true. I was eighty seven years old when I came here.
You say this Companion found you and rejuvenated you? What were you doing in space at the age of eighty seven?
I was tired, Captain. I was going to die, and I wanted to die in space. That's all.
True, his body was never found.
You're looking at it, Mister Spock.
If so, you wear your age very well.
How do you feel?
Terrible. How should I feel?
You're running a little temperature. Perhaps you should lie down.
Doctor, will you please just leave me alone. It's the heat.
All right. Try to relax. Jim, it's started, the fever. It's over a hundred, and it's climbing.
How long do we have?
A matter of hours, that's all.
Mister Cochrane, you say you were brought here a hundred and fifty years ago? You don't look over thirty five.
I haven't aged. The Companion sees to that.
Captain. These instruments, they date from the time indicated. From your ship, Mister Cochrane?
I cannibalised it. The food, water, gardens, everything else I need the Companion gives me. Apparently, it creates it out of the native elements.
You say you can communicate with it. Perhaps you can find out what we're doing here.
I already know.
You wouldn't mind telling us?
You won't like it.
I already don't like it.
You're here to keep me company.
You mean you brought us here?
No, the Companion did. I told it I'd die of loneliness. I thought it would release me. Instead, it brought you here.
No! No! No! That's disgusting! We're not animals! No! Oh, no! It's inhuman! No! No!
Spock, run additional tricorder readings. Learn anything you can. Find me a weapon to use against this thing.
You ask me to find a weapon. Do you intend to destroy it?
I intend to do whatever's necessary to get us off this planet and Commissioner Hedford to the hospital. If the Companion stands in the way, then we push it out of the way. Clear, Spock?
Quite clear, Captain.
Very well. You have your orders. (Spock leaves) Mister Cochrane, if you left here, what would happen to you?
I'd begin to age again, normally.
Do you want to leave here?
Believe me, Captain, immortality consists largely of boredom. What's it like out there in the galaxy?
We're on a thousand planets and spreading out. We cross fantastic distances and everything's alive, Cochrane. Life everywhere. We estimate there are millions of planets with intelligent life. We haven't begun to map them. Interesting?
How would you like to sleep for a hundred and fifty years and wake up in a new world?
It's all out there waiting for you, but we'll need your help to get away.
You've got it.
You seem to think this Companion of yours can do almost anything.
I said it was very powerful.
Could it cure her?
I don't know.
How do you communicate with it?
It's on a non-verbal level, but I usually get my message across.
We've got to try. We're helpless. See if it can do something.
How do you do it?
I just sort of clear my mind and it comes.
Bones, what do you make of that?
Almost a symbiosis of some kind, a sort of joining.
Exactly what I think. Not exactly like a pet owner speaking to a beloved animal, would you say?
No, it's more than that.
Agreed. More like love.
Are you all right?
Yes. It kind of drains me a little, but I'm all right.
Well?
The Companion can't do anything to help Miss Hedford.
Then she'll die.
If there's anything I could do to help, I would, and I will, but we can expect nothing from the Companion.
Spock! Are you all right?
Yes. Quite all right, Doctor. A most fascinating thing happened. Apparently, the Companion imparted to me a rather quaint, old-fashioned electric shock of respectable voltage.
It attacked you?
Evidently. Unquestionably, a large part of its substance is simple electricity.
Oh, yes. I'm not a scientist or a physicist, Mister Spock, but am I correct in assuming that anything that generates electricity can be shorted out?
Quite correct, Doctor.
Put this in the proximity of the Companion, throw this switch, and it will scramble every electrical impulse the creature can produce. It cannot fail.
It troubles you, Cochrane?
The Companion saved my life. It's taken care of me all these years. We've been very close in a way that's hard to explain. I suppose I even have an affection for it.
It's also keeping you prisoner.
I don't want it killed.
We may simply render it powerless.
But you don't know. You could kill it. I won't stand for that.
We're getting out of here, Cochrane. Face up to it. I'll do anything I have to to save all of our lives.
I suppose from your point of view, you're right.
We understand how you feel, Mister Cochrane, but it has to be done.
All right. You want me to contact it?
Please. Outside.
What was it they used to call it? The Judas goat? (leaves)
There is some risk, Captain. We do not know the extent of its powers.
Nor it ours.
Now.
Stop it! You're killing them! Stop it, please! Stop it! You're choking them! Let them go. You're choking them! Stop it!
You all right, Jim?
Yeah.
Spock?
All right.
Cochrane got it off of us, but I don't know whether he did us a favour or not.
What kind of talk is that?
How do you fight a thing like that? I've got a ship up there somewhere, responsibility for four lives here, one of them dying because of me.
It isn't your fault.
I'm in command, Bones. It makes it my fault. How do you fight a thing like that?
Maybe you're a soldier so often that you forget you're also trained to be a diplomat. Why not try a carrot instead of a stick?
Spock.
Yes, Captain?
The universal translator on the shuttlecraft. We can try that, talk to that thing.
The translator is for use with more congruent life forms.
Adjust it, change it. The trouble with immortality is it's boring. Adjusting the translator will give you something to do.
It is possible. If I could widen its pattern of reception
Right down your alley, Spock. Get it here and get to work. That thing is still out there. Better go that way.
Any change?
Yes, for the worse.
Mister Scott. Computer central reports that we're coming up on the co-ordinates of the last established position of the shuttlecraft.
Thank you, Lieutenant.
Steady. No, Mister Scott, bearing three ten mark thirty five just cleared. No antimatter residue.
All scanners, spherical sweep. Range, maximum. They'll have to pick it up.
If the shuttlecraft powered away, Mister Scott, but if it were just towed?
There'd still be traces of residual matter floating around, Lieutenant.
Bearing two ten mark forty. Strong particle concentration. We're on it, Mister Scott.
Lay on that course. Maintain scanning.
Course laid in, sir. Particle density decreasing. Gone, sir. No readings.
Steady as she goes, Mister Sulu.
What do you think it means, Mister Scott?
The shuttlecraft was on schedule until it was shy five hours of rendezvous. Then something happened.
Well, I'd feel a lot better if it were a little more definite.
It didn't wreck. There was no debris. There's no trace of expelled internal atmosphere, no residual radioactivity. Ah, it's. Something took over. Tractor beams maybe. Something. They dragged it away on the heading we're now on.
If there are no further traces, how are we going to follow them?
We stay on this course, see what comes up.
It's a big galaxy, Mister Scott.
Aye.
What's the theory behind this device?
There are certain universal ideas and concepts common to all intelligent life. This device instantaneously compares the frequency of brainwave patterns, selects those ideas and concepts it recognises, and then provides the necessary grammar.
Then it translates its findings into English.
You mean it speaks?
With a voice or the approximation of whatever the creature is on the sending end. Not one hundred percent efficient, but nothing ever is. Ready, Mister Spock?
Quite ready, Captain.
Mister Cochrane, call the Companion.
Companion. (It leaves Cochrane) We wish to talk to you.
How can we communicate? My thoughts, you are hearing them. This is interesting.
Feminine. No doubt about it.
Yes. The matter of gender could change the entire situation.
I'm way ahead of you.
Then it is not a zookeeper.
No. A lover. Companion. It is wrong to keep us here against our will.
A man needs the company of his own kind, or he will cease to exist. He felt it to me.
One of us will cease to exist if we don't get her to a place where we can care for her.
The man needs others of his species. That is why you are here. The man must continue.
Companion, try to understand. It is the nature of our species to be free, just as it is your nature to stay here. We will cease to exist in captivity.
Your bodies have stopped their peculiar degeneration. There will be nothing to harm you. You will continue, and the man will continue. This is necessary.
This is a marvellous opportunity to add to our knowledge. Ask it about its nature, its history.
This isn't a classroom. I'm trying to get us out of here.
A chance like this may never come again. It could tell us so much.
This isn't the time. Companion, what you offer us is not continuation. It is non=existence. We will cease to exist. Even the man will cease to exist.
Captain, why did you build that translator with a feminine voice?
We didn't.
But I heard
The idea of male and female are universal constants, Cochrane. There's no doubt about it. The Companion is female.
I don't understand.
You don't? A blind man could see it with a cane. You're not a pet. You're not a specimen kept in a cage. You're a lover.
I'm a what?
Her attitude when she approaches you is profoundly different than when she contacts us. Her appearance is soft, gentle. Her voice is melodic, pleasing. I do not totally understand the emotion, but it obviously exists. The Companion loves you.
Do you know what you're saying? For all these years, I've let something as alien as that crawl around inside me, into my mind, my feelings.
What are you complaining about? It kept you alive.
That thing fed on me. It used me. It's disgusting.
There's nothing disgusting about it. It's just another life form, that's all. You get used to those things.
You're as bad as it is.
Your highly emotional reaction is most illogical. Your relationship with the Companion has for one hundred and fifty years been emotionally satisfying, eminently practical, and totally harmless. It may indeed have been quite beneficial.
Is this what the future holds? Men who have no notion of decency or morality? Maybe I'm a hundred and fifty years out of style, but I'm not going to be fodder for any inhuman monster. (leaves)
Fascinating. A totally parochial attitude.
Doctor. Doctor.
Right here, Miss Hedford.
I heard him. He was loved and he resents it.
You just rest.
No. I don't want to die. I've been good at my job, but I've never been loved. Never. What kind of life is that? Not to be loved, never to have shown love? And he runs away from love. (cries)
Approaching what seems to be an asteroid belt, sir. Scanners report approximately seven thousand bodies of sizes running from types A to N.
Atmosphere count?
Approximately thirty four percent of the bodies of atmospherian types H to M.
All right, then. We'll do it the hard way. All sensors set for life form registration. Automatic selection.
Mister Scott, there are thousands of them out there they could be on, if they're on any of them at all.
That's right, Lieutenant. Thousands. And we'll look them over one by one.
Companion, do you love the man?
I do not understand.
Is he important to you, more important than anything? Is he as though he were a part of you?
He is part of me. The man must continue.
He will not continue. He will cease to exist. By your feeling for him, you are condemning him to an existence he will find unbearable. He will cease to exist.
He does not age. He remains forever.
You speak of his body. I speak of his spirit. Companion, inside the shelter, a female of our species is dying. She will not continue. That is what will happen to the man unless you release all of us.
I do not understand.
Our species can only survive if we have obstacles to overcome. You take away all obstacles. Without them to strengthen us, we will weaken and die. You regard the man only as a toy. You amuse yourself with him.
You are wrong. The man is the centre of all things. I care for him.
But you can't really love him. You haven't the slightest knowledge of love, the total union of two people. You are the Companion. He is the man. You are two different things. You can't join. You can't love. You may keep him here forever, but you will always be separate, apart from him.
If I were human there can be love? (vanishes)
What did you hope to gain by that, Jim?
Try to convince her of the hopelessness of it. Love sometimes expresses itself in sacrifice. I thought maybe if she loved him, she'd let him go.
But she or it is inhuman, Captain. You cannot expect her to react like a human.
I tried.
It's useless. I know.
(standing in the doorway) Zefram Cochrane.
Bones?
I don't understand it. She's not sick at all.
We understand.
It's her.
What?
Don't you understand? It's the Companion.
Bones?
She's perfectly healthy. Heart like a hammer, respiration normal, blood pressure normal. This is medically impossible.
We are here.
We?
Both of us. Those you knew as the Commissioner and the Companion. We are both here.
Companion, you do not have the power to create life.
That is for the Maker of all things.
Commissioner Hedford was dying.
That part of us was too weak to hold on. In a moment, there would have been no continuing. Now we're together.
Then you are both here, in the one body?
We are one.
Zefram, we frighten you. We've never frightened you before. Loneliness. This is loneliness. Oh, what a bitter thing. Oh, Zefram, it's so sad. How do you bear it, this loneliness?
Spock, check out the shuttlecraft. Engine, communications, everything.
That will not be necessary, Captain. Your vehicle will operate as before, so will the communications device.
You're letting us go?
We could do nothing now to stop you. You said we would not know love because we were not human. Now we are human. We'll know the change of days. We will know death. But to touch the hand of man, nothing is as important.
You're very beautiful.
Part of me understands. Part does not. But it pleases me.
I could explain many things.
Oh, let me walk, Zefram. Let me feel the earth against my feet. Let me feel the warmth of the sun on my face. You beside me. Let me feel these things.
Go ahead, Cochrane We have a few things to do.
Mister Scott, it's the Captain.
Put him on. Lock on to his co-ordinates. Captain, this is Scotty. Are you all right?
Perfectly all right. Can you get a fix on us.
The helm is computing your position now, Captain.
Course two twenty four mark twelve. ETA fifty seven minutes.
We'll be there in 57 minutes, sir.
Very good. I'll continue transmitting. Assume standard orbit when you arrive. We'll transport up in the shuttlecraft.
What happened, Captain?
Interesting story, Scotty. I can't tell you now because, quite frankly, I don't know how it's going to end. Kirk out.
Everything will be an eye-opener to you. There's a thousand planets out there, a thousand races, and I'll show everything to you, soon as I learn my way around again. Maybe I can make up a little for everything you've done for me.
I can't go with you, Zefram.
Of course you can. You have to.
My life emanates from this place. If I should leave it for more than a tiny march of days, I'll cease to exist. I must return, even as you must consume matter to maintain your life.
You gave up everything to be human? But even if you stay here, you'll eventually die.
The joy of this hour. I am pleased.
Well, I can't just fly away and leave you here.
You must be free, Zefram Cochrane.
You saved my life, took care of me. You loved me. I never understood. I do now.
We're locked in, Captain. Standard orbit established. Shuttlecraft bay standing by to receive you.
Stand by, Scotty.
The Enterprise is waiting, Mister Cochrane.
I can't take her away from here. If I do, she'll die. If I leave her, she'll die of loneliness. I owe everything to her. I can't leave her. I love her. Is that surprising?
Not coming from a human being. You are, after all, essentially irrational.
Think it over, Mister Cochrane. There's a whole galaxy out there waiting to honour you.
I have honours enough.
But you will age, both of you. There will be no immortality. You'll both grow old here and finally die.
That's been happening to men and women for a long time. I've got the feeling it's one of the pleasanter things about being human, as long as you grow old together.
Are you sure?
There's plenty of water here. The climate's good for growing things. I might try to plant a fig tree. A man's entitled to that, isn't he? It isn't gratitude, Captain. Now that I see her, touch her, I know that I love her. We'll have a lot of years together. They'll be happy ones.
All the best.
Captain, don't tell them about me.
Not a word, Mister Cochrane.
Jim, what about that war on Epsilon Canaris Three?
Well, I'm sure the Federation can find another woman somewhere who'll stop that war.
We have reached projected point three, Captain. Adjust to new course two oh one mark one five.
Thank you, Mister Spock.
(offering a drink) Jim.
How is she, Doc?
No change.
Small thanks to the Starfleet.
Now really, Commissioner, you can't blame the Starfleet.
I should've received the proper inoculations ahead of time.
Sakuro's disease is extremely rare. The chances of anyone contracting it are literally billions to one.
I was sent to Epsilon Canaris Three to prevent a war, Doctor. Thanks to the inefficiency of the medical branch of the Starfleet, I've been forced to leave before my job was done.
Commissioner, I can assure you that once we reach the Enterprise, with its medical facilities, we'll have you back to your job in time for you to prevent that war.
How soon will we rendezvous with that ship of yours, Captain?
In exactly four hours, twenty one minutes, Commissioner.
Captain.
Yes?
Will you check your automatic scanner, please?
That's odd. I've never seen anything like that before.
Nor have I.
Heading directly toward us at warp speed.
Staying right with us. Sensor readings, Mister Spock.
Vaguely like a cloud of ionised hydrogen, but with strong erratic electrical impulses.
We've got it.
Helm does not answer, Captain.
Neither do the pods. Communications are dead. Building overload. Cut all power relays.
Cut, Captain.
What's happening? I demand to know.
You already know as much as we do, Miss Hedford. Whatever that thing is outside, it's yanked us off course from the Enterprise.
Now on course nine eight mark one two, heading directly toward Gamma Canaris region.
Jim, we've got to get Miss Hedford to the Enterprise. Her condition.
I know, Bones, but there's nothing I can do about it.
I insist you make your scheduled rendezvous with the Enterprise.
Miss Hedford, we'll do what we can, when we can. At the moment, we're helpless. You might as well sit back and enjoy the ride.
Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please, come in. Enterprise, this is the Galileo. Come in, please. It's no good. We're not transmitting. Bones?
Oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere. Some krypton, argon, neon. Temperature seventy five degrees Fahrenheit. Practically identical to Earth atmosphere.
Spock?
Gravity is similar to Earth. Most unusual in view of its size. The bulk of the body seems to be iron and nickel. More than an asteroid. Like a small planetoid, I should say. Possibly a remnant of a planet breakup. Totally suitable for human life.
All right, we get out and get up. Issue phasers. Bones, maintain full alert. Commissioner, you'll stay inside.
Just how long am I supposed to stay inside, Captain?
That's a very good question. I wish I could answer it. All right. Let's go.
Take a look around, Bones.
Most unusual. Unlikely. In fact, Captain, I would say quite impossible.
Nothing wrong and nothing works.
Precisely.
There must be a reason.
Obviously.
Let's look a little further.
Jim, I just took a tricording sweep, and I got the same readings almost as Spock got when we were pulled off course.
The ionised cloud.
I think so, only it reads here on the surface with us. It's in that direction, and it doesn't read solid. It's more unstable, tenuous, like a collection of gases.
Hello! Hello!
Fascinating.
Bones, get a physiological reading on that, whatever it is.
Hello! Are you real? I mean, I'm not imagining you, am I?
We're real enough.
You speak English. Earth people?
From the Federation.
The F? Well, it doesn't matter. I'm Cochrane. I've been marooned here who knows how long. If you only knew how good it is to see you. And a woman. A beautiful one at that.
I'm Captain James T. Kirk, commanding the starship Enterprise. (they shake hands) This is my first officer Mister Spock.
You're a Vulcan, aren't you?
Correct.
Chief Surgeon Leonard McCoy.
Doctor.
Pleasure.
Oh, and excuse me, Assistant Federation Commissioner Hedford.
Ma'am. You're food to a starving man. All of you. Hey, that's a nice ship. Simple and clean. Been trying to get her to go again? Well, forget it. It won't work.
He's human, Jim. Everything checks out perfectly.
Mister Cochrane. We were forced off our course and taken here by some force we couldn't identify.
Which seems to be on the surface of this body at the moment.
Well, I wouldn't know anything about that.
You say we'll be unable to get the ship to function again?
Not a chance. There's some sort of dampening field down here. Power systems don't work. Take my word for it.
You don't mind if we continue to try?
Go right ahead. You've got plenty of time.
What about you, Cochrane? How did you get here?
Marooned, I told you. Look, we'll have lots of time to learn about each other. I have a small place over that way. All the comforts of home. I can even offer you a hot bath.
How perceptive of you to notice I needed one.
If you don't mind, Mister Cochrane, I'd like more than just a statement that you were marooned here. It's a long way off the beaten path.
That's right. That's why I'm so glad to see you. Look, I'll tell you everything you want to know, but not here. Your ship is sure a beauty.
Yes, she is. And you've been out of circulation quite a while. The principles may be new to you. Mister Spock, why don't you explain our methods of propulsion to Mister Cochrane?
Talks a lot, but he doesn't say much.
I've noticed something else.
What's that?
He looks familiar.
Familiar? Now that you mention it, he does.
I can't quite place him, but. What about Miss Hedford?
No temperature yet, but we've got to get under way soon, Jim. I guarantee you, it will develop. What are we going to do?
Take Cochrane up on his offer.
You built this, Mister Cochrane?
Yes. I had tools and supplies left over from my crash.
Not bad.
Not Earth, but it's livable. I grow vegetables in the fields over that next ridge. Come on in.
All the comforts of home indeed, Mister Cochrane. Where'd you get the antiques?
You mean my instruments? I imagine things have changed a lot since I crashed.
Not that much.
Must you keep it so terribly hot in here?
The temperature's a constant seventy two degrees. Let me get you something cool to drink.
Do you feel hot?
I feel infuriated, deeply put upon, and absolutely outraged.
It was quite a hike here. You're tired. Just take it easy for a while.
I'll rest later, Doctor.
Temperature, Captain. First sign.
Yes, I know. It means we're running out of time.
Captain, Doctor.
What was that?
Well, sometimes the light plays tricks on you. You'd be surprised what I've imagined I've seen around here sometimes.
We imagined nothing, Mister Cochrane. There was an entity out there and I suspect it was the same entity which brought us here. Please explain.
There's nothing to explain.
Thank you.
You'll find I have a very low tolerance level where the safety of my people are concerned. We find you out here, where no human has any business being. We were virtually hijacked in space and brought here. Now I'm not just requesting an explanation, Mister. I'm demanding one.
All right. It was the Companion.
The what?
That's what I call it. As a matter of fact, Captain, I didn't crash here. I was brought here in my disabled ship. I was almost dead. The Companion saved my life.
You were injured?
I was dying, Mister Spock.
You seem perfectly all right now. What was the matter?
I was an old man.
You were what?
Well, I don't know how it did it, but the Companion rejuvenated me, made me young again, like I am now.
I prefer to reserve judgment on that part of your story, sir. Meanwhile, would you please explain exactly what this Companion of yours is?
I told you, I don't know what it is. It exists, it lives, and I can communicate with it.
That's a pretty far out story.
Mister Cochrane, do you have a first name?
Zefram.
Zefram Cochrane of Alpha Centuri, the discoverer of the space warp?
That's right, Captain.
But that's impossible. Zefram Cochrane died a hundred and fifty years ago.
The name of Zefram Cochrane is revered throughout the known galaxy. Planets were named after him. Great universities, cities.
Isn't your story a little improbable, Mister Cochrane?
No, it's true. I was eighty seven years old when I came here.
You say this Companion found you and rejuvenated you? What were you doing in space at the age of eighty seven?
I was tired, Captain. I was going to die, and I wanted to die in space. That's all.
True, his body was never found.
You're looking at it, Mister Spock.
If so, you wear your age very well.
How do you feel?
Terrible. How should I feel?
You're running a little temperature. Perhaps you should lie down.
Doctor, will you please just leave me alone. It's the heat.
All right. Try to relax. Jim, it's started, the fever. It's over a hundred, and it's climbing.
How long do we have?
A matter of hours, that's all.
Mister Cochrane, you say you were brought here a hundred and fifty years ago? You don't look over thirty five.
I haven't aged. The Companion sees to that.
Captain. These instruments, they date from the time indicated. From your ship, Mister Cochrane?
I cannibalised it. The food, water, gardens, everything else I need the Companion gives me. Apparently, it creates it out of the native elements.
You say you can communicate with it. Perhaps you can find out what we're doing here.
I already know.
You wouldn't mind telling us?
You won't like it.
I already don't like it.
You're here to keep me company.
You mean you brought us here?
No, the Companion did. I told it I'd die of loneliness. I thought it would release me. Instead, it brought you here.
No! No! No! That's disgusting! We're not animals! No! Oh, no! It's inhuman! No! No!
Spock, run additional tricorder readings. Learn anything you can. Find me a weapon to use against this thing.
You ask me to find a weapon. Do you intend to destroy it?
I intend to do whatever's necessary to get us off this planet and Commissioner Hedford to the hospital. If the Companion stands in the way, then we push it out of the way. Clear, Spock?
Quite clear, Captain.
Very well. You have your orders. (Spock leaves) Mister Cochrane, if you left here, what would happen to you?
I'd begin to age again, normally.
Do you want to leave here?
Believe me, Captain, immortality consists largely of boredom. What's it like out there in the galaxy?
We're on a thousand planets and spreading out. We cross fantastic distances and everything's alive, Cochrane. Life everywhere. We estimate there are millions of planets with intelligent life. We haven't begun to map them. Interesting?
How would you like to sleep for a hundred and fifty years and wake up in a new world?
It's all out there waiting for you, but we'll need your help to get away.
You've got it.
You seem to think this Companion of yours can do almost anything.
I said it was very powerful.
Could it cure her?
I don't know.
How do you communicate with it?
It's on a non-verbal level, but I usually get my message across.
We've got to try. We're helpless. See if it can do something.
How do you do it?
I just sort of clear my mind and it comes.
Bones, what do you make of that?
Almost a symbiosis of some kind, a sort of joining.
Exactly what I think. Not exactly like a pet owner speaking to a beloved animal, would you say?
No, it's more than that.
Agreed. More like love.
Are you all right?
Yes. It kind of drains me a little, but I'm all right.
Well?
The Companion can't do anything to help Miss Hedford.
Then she'll die.
If there's anything I could do to help, I would, and I will, but we can expect nothing from the Companion.
Spock! Are you all right?
Yes. Quite all right, Doctor. A most fascinating thing happened. Apparently, the Companion imparted to me a rather quaint, old-fashioned electric shock of respectable voltage.
It attacked you?
Evidently. Unquestionably, a large part of its substance is simple electricity.
Oh, yes. I'm not a scientist or a physicist, Mister Spock, but am I correct in assuming that anything that generates electricity can be shorted out?
Quite correct, Doctor.
Put this in the proximity of the Companion, throw this switch, and it will scramble every electrical impulse the creature can produce. It cannot fail.
It troubles you, Cochrane?
The Companion saved my life. It's taken care of me all these years. We've been very close in a way that's hard to explain. I suppose I even have an affection for it.
It's also keeping you prisoner.
I don't want it killed.
We may simply render it powerless.
But you don't know. You could kill it. I won't stand for that.
We're getting out of here, Cochrane. Face up to it. I'll do anything I have to to save all of our lives.
I suppose from your point of view, you're right.
We understand how you feel, Mister Cochrane, but it has to be done.
All right. You want me to contact it?
Please. Outside.
What was it they used to call it? The Judas goat? (leaves)
There is some risk, Captain. We do not know the extent of its powers.
Nor it ours.
Now.
Stop it! You're killing them! Stop it, please! Stop it! You're choking them! Let them go. You're choking them! Stop it!
You all right, Jim?
Yeah.
Spock?
All right.
Cochrane got it off of us, but I don't know whether he did us a favour or not.
What kind of talk is that?
How do you fight a thing like that? I've got a ship up there somewhere, responsibility for four lives here, one of them dying because of me.
It isn't your fault.
I'm in command, Bones. It makes it my fault. How do you fight a thing like that?
Maybe you're a soldier so often that you forget you're also trained to be a diplomat. Why not try a carrot instead of a stick?
Spock.
Yes, Captain?
The universal translator on the shuttlecraft. We can try that, talk to that thing.
The translator is for use with more congruent life forms.
Adjust it, change it. The trouble with immortality is it's boring. Adjusting the translator will give you something to do.
It is possible. If I could widen its pattern of reception
Right down your alley, Spock. Get it here and get to work. That thing is still out there. Better go that way.
Any change?
Yes, for the worse.
Mister Scott. Computer central reports that we're coming up on the co-ordinates of the last established position of the shuttlecraft.
Thank you, Lieutenant.
Steady. No, Mister Scott, bearing three ten mark thirty five just cleared. No antimatter residue.
All scanners, spherical sweep. Range, maximum. They'll have to pick it up.
If the shuttlecraft powered away, Mister Scott, but if it were just towed?
There'd still be traces of residual matter floating around, Lieutenant.
Bearing two ten mark forty. Strong particle concentration. We're on it, Mister Scott.
Lay on that course. Maintain scanning.
Course laid in, sir. Particle density decreasing. Gone, sir. No readings.
Steady as she goes, Mister Sulu.
What do you think it means, Mister Scott?
The shuttlecraft was on schedule until it was shy five hours of rendezvous. Then something happened.
Well, I'd feel a lot better if it were a little more definite.
It didn't wreck. There was no debris. There's no trace of expelled internal atmosphere, no residual radioactivity. Ah, it's. Something took over. Tractor beams maybe. Something. They dragged it away on the heading we're now on.
If there are no further traces, how are we going to follow them?
We stay on this course, see what comes up.
It's a big galaxy, Mister Scott.
Aye.
What's the theory behind this device?
There are certain universal ideas and concepts common to all intelligent life. This device instantaneously compares the frequency of brainwave patterns, selects those ideas and concepts it recognises, and then provides the necessary grammar.
Then it translates its findings into English.
You mean it speaks?
With a voice or the approximation of whatever the creature is on the sending end. Not one hundred percent efficient, but nothing ever is. Ready, Mister Spock?
Quite ready, Captain.
Mister Cochrane, call the Companion.
Companion. (It leaves Cochrane) We wish to talk to you.
How can we communicate? My thoughts, you are hearing them. This is interesting.
Feminine. No doubt about it.
Yes. The matter of gender could change the entire situation.
I'm way ahead of you.
Then it is not a zookeeper.
No. A lover. Companion. It is wrong to keep us here against our will.
A man needs the company of his own kind, or he will cease to exist. He felt it to me.
One of us will cease to exist if we don't get her to a place where we can care for her.
The man needs others of his species. That is why you are here. The man must continue.
Companion, try to understand. It is the nature of our species to be free, just as it is your nature to stay here. We will cease to exist in captivity.
Your bodies have stopped their peculiar degeneration. There will be nothing to harm you. You will continue, and the man will continue. This is necessary.
This is a marvellous opportunity to add to our knowledge. Ask it about its nature, its history.
This isn't a classroom. I'm trying to get us out of here.
A chance like this may never come again. It could tell us so much.
This isn't the time. Companion, what you offer us is not continuation. It is non=existence. We will cease to exist. Even the man will cease to exist.
Captain, why did you build that translator with a feminine voice?
We didn't.
But I heard
The idea of male and female are universal constants, Cochrane. There's no doubt about it. The Companion is female.
I don't understand.
You don't? A blind man could see it with a cane. You're not a pet. You're not a specimen kept in a cage. You're a lover.
I'm a what?
Her attitude when she approaches you is profoundly different than when she contacts us. Her appearance is soft, gentle. Her voice is melodic, pleasing. I do not totally understand the emotion, but it obviously exists. The Companion loves you.
Do you know what you're saying? For all these years, I've let something as alien as that crawl around inside me, into my mind, my feelings.
What are you complaining about? It kept you alive.
That thing fed on me. It used me. It's disgusting.
There's nothing disgusting about it. It's just another life form, that's all. You get used to those things.
You're as bad as it is.
Your highly emotional reaction is most illogical. Your relationship with the Companion has for one hundred and fifty years been emotionally satisfying, eminently practical, and totally harmless. It may indeed have been quite beneficial.
Is this what the future holds? Men who have no notion of decency or morality? Maybe I'm a hundred and fifty years out of style, but I'm not going to be fodder for any inhuman monster. (leaves)
Fascinating. A totally parochial attitude.
Doctor. Doctor.
Right here, Miss Hedford.
I heard him. He was loved and he resents it.
You just rest.
No. I don't want to die. I've been good at my job, but I've never been loved. Never. What kind of life is that? Not to be loved, never to have shown love? And he runs away from love. (cries)
Approaching what seems to be an asteroid belt, sir. Scanners report approximately seven thousand bodies of sizes running from types A to N.
Atmosphere count?
Approximately thirty four percent of the bodies of atmospherian types H to M.
All right, then. We'll do it the hard way. All sensors set for life form registration. Automatic selection.
Mister Scott, there are thousands of them out there they could be on, if they're on any of them at all.
That's right, Lieutenant. Thousands. And we'll look them over one by one.
Companion, do you love the man?
I do not understand.
Is he important to you, more important than anything? Is he as though he were a part of you?
He is part of me. The man must continue.
He will not continue. He will cease to exist. By your feeling for him, you are condemning him to an existence he will find unbearable. He will cease to exist.
He does not age. He remains forever.
You speak of his body. I speak of his spirit. Companion, inside the shelter, a female of our species is dying. She will not continue. That is what will happen to the man unless you release all of us.
I do not understand.
Our species can only survive if we have obstacles to overcome. You take away all obstacles. Without them to strengthen us, we will weaken and die. You regard the man only as a toy. You amuse yourself with him.
You are wrong. The man is the centre of all things. I care for him.
But you can't really love him. You haven't the slightest knowledge of love, the total union of two people. You are the Companion. He is the man. You are two different things. You can't join. You can't love. You may keep him here forever, but you will always be separate, apart from him.
If I were human there can be love? (vanishes)
What did you hope to gain by that, Jim?
Try to convince her of the hopelessness of it. Love sometimes expresses itself in sacrifice. I thought maybe if she loved him, she'd let him go.
But she or it is inhuman, Captain. You cannot expect her to react like a human.
I tried.
It's useless. I know.
(standing in the doorway) Zefram Cochrane.
Bones?
I don't understand it. She's not sick at all.
We understand.
It's her.
What?
Don't you understand? It's the Companion.
Bones?
She's perfectly healthy. Heart like a hammer, respiration normal, blood pressure normal. This is medically impossible.
We are here.
We?
Both of us. Those you knew as the Commissioner and the Companion. We are both here.
Companion, you do not have the power to create life.
That is for the Maker of all things.
Commissioner Hedford was dying.
That part of us was too weak to hold on. In a moment, there would have been no continuing. Now we're together.
Then you are both here, in the one body?
We are one.
Zefram, we frighten you. We've never frightened you before. Loneliness. This is loneliness. Oh, what a bitter thing. Oh, Zefram, it's so sad. How do you bear it, this loneliness?
Spock, check out the shuttlecraft. Engine, communications, everything.
That will not be necessary, Captain. Your vehicle will operate as before, so will the communications device.
You're letting us go?
We could do nothing now to stop you. You said we would not know love because we were not human. Now we are human. We'll know the change of days. We will know death. But to touch the hand of man, nothing is as important.
You're very beautiful.
Part of me understands. Part does not. But it pleases me.
I could explain many things.
Oh, let me walk, Zefram. Let me feel the earth against my feet. Let me feel the warmth of the sun on my face. You beside me. Let me feel these things.
Go ahead, Cochrane We have a few things to do.
Mister Scott, it's the Captain.
Put him on. Lock on to his co-ordinates. Captain, this is Scotty. Are you all right?
Perfectly all right. Can you get a fix on us.
The helm is computing your position now, Captain.
Course two twenty four mark twelve. ETA fifty seven minutes.
We'll be there in 57 minutes, sir.
Very good. I'll continue transmitting. Assume standard orbit when you arrive. We'll transport up in the shuttlecraft.
What happened, Captain?
Interesting story, Scotty. I can't tell you now because, quite frankly, I don't know how it's going to end. Kirk out.
Everything will be an eye-opener to you. There's a thousand planets out there, a thousand races, and I'll show everything to you, soon as I learn my way around again. Maybe I can make up a little for everything you've done for me.
I can't go with you, Zefram.
Of course you can. You have to.
My life emanates from this place. If I should leave it for more than a tiny march of days, I'll cease to exist. I must return, even as you must consume matter to maintain your life.
You gave up everything to be human? But even if you stay here, you'll eventually die.
The joy of this hour. I am pleased.
Well, I can't just fly away and leave you here.
You must be free, Zefram Cochrane.
You saved my life, took care of me. You loved me. I never understood. I do now.
We're locked in, Captain. Standard orbit established. Shuttlecraft bay standing by to receive you.
Stand by, Scotty.
The Enterprise is waiting, Mister Cochrane.
I can't take her away from here. If I do, she'll die. If I leave her, she'll die of loneliness. I owe everything to her. I can't leave her. I love her. Is that surprising?
Not coming from a human being. You are, after all, essentially irrational.
Think it over, Mister Cochrane. There's a whole galaxy out there waiting to honour you.
I have honours enough.
But you will age, both of you. There will be no immortality. You'll both grow old here and finally die.
That's been happening to men and women for a long time. I've got the feeling it's one of the pleasanter things about being human, as long as you grow old together.
Are you sure?
There's plenty of water here. The climate's good for growing things. I might try to plant a fig tree. A man's entitled to that, isn't he? It isn't gratitude, Captain. Now that I see her, touch her, I know that I love her. We'll have a lot of years together. They'll be happy ones.
All the best.
Captain, don't tell them about me.
Not a word, Mister Cochrane.
Jim, what about that war on Epsilon Canaris Three?
Well, I'm sure the Federation can find another woman somewhere who'll stop that war.
Journey to Babel
Dress uniforms, spit and polish. I don't know how much longer I'm going to be able to stand this. I feel like my neck's in a sling.
The Vulcans are the last delegates we have to pick up. As soon as we get them aboard, we'll be able to relax.
Sure. A formal reception tonight, a hundred and fourteen delegates aboard for two weeks, thirty two of them ambassadors, (Spock joins them) half of them mad at the other half, and the whole lot touchier than a raw antimatter pile over this Coridan question.
Kirk here.
Shuttlecraft approaching with Ambassador Sarek's party. Estimate arrival one minute.
Bring them aboard, Mister Chekov.
Standby to recover shuttlecraft. Honour guard to the hangar deck.
Clear hangar deck. Clear hangar deck. Depressurising. Recovering shuttlecraft. Hangar deck pressurising.
How does that Vulcan salute go?
That hurts worse than the uniform.
Captain James Kirk.
Captain.
My First Officer, Commander Spock.
Vulcan honours us with your presence. We come to serve.
Your service honours us, Captain.
Thank you. Chief Medical Officer Doctor McCoy.
Ambassador.
Doctor. My aides and she who is my wife.
Captain Kirk.
Our pleasure, madam. As soon as you're settled I'll arrange a tour of the ship. Mister Spock will conduct you.
I'd prefer another guide, Captain.
As you wish, Ambassador. Mister Spock, we'll leave orbit in two hours. Would you care to beam down and visit your parents?
Captain, Ambassador Sarek and his wife are my parents.
This is the engineering section. There are a number of emergency back-up systems for the main controls. Over here are a number of control computers.
After all these years among humans, you still haven't learned to smile.
Humans smile with so little provocation.
And you haven't come to see us in four years, either.
The situation between my father and myself has not changed.
My wife, attend.
Mister Spock. A moment, if you please.
Yes, Captain?
Explain the computer components.
I gave Spock his first instruction in computers, Captain. He chose to devote his knowledge to Starfleet instead of the Vulcan Science Academy.
If you will excuse me, Captain. (leaves)
I'm sorry, Ambassador. I did not mean to offend. I thought that
Offence is a human emotion. I'm returning to my quarters. Continue, my wife. (leaves)
Mrs. Sarek, I just don't understand.
Amanda. I'm afraid you couldn't pronounce the Vulcan name.
Can you?
After a fashion, and after many years of practice. Shall we continue the tour? My husband did request it.
It sounded more like a command.
Of course. He's a Vulcan. I'm his wife.
And Spock is his son.
You don't understand the Vulcan way, Captain. It's logical. It's a better way than ours. But it's not easy. It has kept Spock and Sarek from speaking as father and son for eighteen years.
Spock is my best officer, and my friend.
I'm glad he has such a friend. It hasn't been easy on Spock. Neither human nor Vulcan. At home nowhere except Starfleet.
I take it that Spock disagreed with his father on a choice of career.
My husband has nothing against Starfleet. But Vulcans believe that peace should not depend on force.
Starfleet force is used only as a last resort. We're an instrument of civilisation. And it's a better opportunity for a scientist to study the universe than he can get at the Vulcan Science Academy.
Perhaps. But Sarek wanted Spock to follow his teachings, as Sarek followed the teachings of his own father.
They are both stubborn.
A human trait, Captain?
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Excuse me. Kirk here.
Captain, I've picked up some sort of signal. Just a few symbols. Nothing intelligible.
Source?
That's what bothers me, sir. Impossible to locate. There wasn't enough of it. Sensors show nothing in the area, but it was a strong signal, as though it was very close.
Go to alert status four. Begin long-range scanning. Kirk out.
Mister Ambassador, I understand you had retired before this conference was called. Forgive my curiosity, but as a doctor, I'm interested in Vulcan physiology. Isn't it unusual for a Vulcan to retire at your age? After all, you're only a hundred and two.
One hundred two point four three seven precisely, Doctor, measured in your years. I had other concerns.
Ambassador.
(a stout chap with a porcine nose) Sarek of Vulcan, do you vote to admit Coridan to the Federation? 
The vote will not be taken here, Ambassador Gav. My government's instructions will be heard in the council chambers on Babel.
No! You! How do you vote, Sarek of Vulcan?
(thin and blue, with two antennae) Why must you know, Tellarite?
In council, his vote carries others. I will know where he stands and why.
Tellarites do not argue for reasons. They simply argue.
No. You
Gentlemen. Ambassador Sarek is quite correct when he points out this is not the council chamber of Babel. I'm fully aware that the admission of Coridan is a highly debatable issue, but you won't solve it here.
You are correct, Captain. Quite logical.
My apologies, Captain.
You will excuse me. (stalks away)
Have you met Gav before, Ambassador?
We debated during my last council session. Ambassador.
Ambassador Gav lost.
Spock, I've always suspected that you were a little more human than you let on. Mrs. Sarek, I know about the rigorous training of the Vulcan youth, but tell me, did he ever run and play like the human children, even in secret?
Well, he, he did have a pet sehlat he was very fond of.
Sehlat?
It's sort of a fat teddy bear.
A teddy bear?
Excuse me, Doctor. It has been a rather long day for my wife. Captain.
Ambassador.
A teddy bear.
Not precisely, Doctor. On Vulcan, the teddy bears are alive, and they have six-inch fangs.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Captain, sensors are registering an unidentified vessel pacing us.
On my way. All duty personnel on Yellow Alert. Don't alarm the passengers. Kirk out.
Report.
A small ship, Captain. It's been there five minutes, remaining outside phaser range at extreme limit of sensors.
Identification, Spock?
Sensors indicate the size of a scout ship, but the configuration is unfamiliar. Most unusual.
Does she answer a hail?
I've tried all frequencies and hooked in the universal translator. No response, sir.
Starfleet records no authorised vessel in this quadrant except ours.
Care to guess what she is?
Guess, Captain? I shall need more data for my estimate.
Mister Chekov, plot course to intercept that vessel. I want to see what she looks like close up.
Aye, sir.
You embarrassed Spock this evening. Not even a mother may do that. He is a Vulcan.
He's also human.
He's a Starfleet officer.
I thought you didn't approve of Starfleet.
It is not a question of approval. The fact exists. He is in Starfleet. He must command respect if he is to function.
Sarek, you're proud of him, aren't you? You're showing almost human pride in your son.
It does not require pride to ask that Spock be given the respect which is his due. Not as my son, but as Spock. Do you understand?
Not really, but it doesn't matter. I love you anyway. I know. It isn't logical.
Vessel changing course, heading toward us at high warp speed.
Ready main phasers.
Phasers armed and ready, sir.
Interesting. They were travelling at approximately warp ten.
Back on original course, Mister Chekov. Report on intruder's movements.
Captain, Starfleet acknowledges report on our situation and confirms no authorised Federation vessel in this quadrant.
Back on original heading, Captain. The intruder changed course immediately after we did. It's paralleling us again.
Well, we have a shadow. Faster, more manoeuvrable and unidentified. Mister Spock, full analysis of sensor readings. I want to know who that intruder is.
Vulcan, I would speak to you.
It does seem unavoidable.
How do you vote on the Coridan admission?
You seem unwilling to wait for the council meeting, Ambassador. No matter. We favour admission.
You favour? Why?
Under Federation law, Coridan can be protected and its wealth administered for the benefit of its people.
That's well for you. Vulcan has no mining interest.
Coridan has nearly unlimited wealth of dilithium crystals, but it is under-populated and unprotected. This invites illegal mining operations.
Illegal? You accuse us?
Some of your ships have been carrying Coridan dilithium crystals.
You call us thieves?
Gentlemen. Gentlemen. Whatever arguments you have between yourselves is your business. My business is running the ship. As long as I command, there will be order.
Of course, Captain.
Understood. There will be payment for your slander, Sarek.
Threats are illogical. And payment is usually expensive.
Security to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Lieutenant Joseph, sir. I'm on deck eleven, section A3. I've just found one of the Tellarites murdered. I think it's the ambassador himself, sir.
How was he killed?
His neck was broken. By an expert.
Explain.
Well, from the nature and location of the break, I'd say the killer knew exactly where to apply pressure to snap the neck instantly.
Who aboard would have that knowledge?
Vulcans. On Vulcan, the method is called tal-shaya. It was considered a merciful form of execution in ancient times.
Spock. A short time ago, I broke up an argument between Gav and your father.
Indeed, Captain? Interesting.
Interesting? Spock, do you realise that makes your father the most likely suspect?
Vulcans do not approve of violence.
You're saying he couldn't have done it?
No, Captain. I'm merely saying it would be illogical to kill without reason.
But if he had a reason, could he have done it?
If there were a reason, my father is quite capable of killing. Logically and efficiently.
Mrs. Sarek, I'm sorry to disturb you. I must speak to your husband.
He's been gone for some time. It's his habit to meditate in private before retiring. What's wrong? Spock?
You want something of me, Captain?
Ambassador, the Tellarite. Gav has been murdered.
His neck was broken, Mister Ambassador, by what Spock describes as tal-shaya.
Indeed? Interesting.
Yes. Ambassador, where were you during the past hour?
Captain, you're not accusing him?
Mother. If only on circumstantial evidence, he is a logical suspect.
I quite agree.
Then where were you during the hour?
In private meditation, Captain. Spock will tell you that such meditation is a personal experience, not to be discussed. especially not with Earthmen.
That's a very convenient excuse, Ambassador.
Sarek. Sarek. What's wrong?
It's difficult to say with Vulcan physiology, but I believe it's something to do with his cardiovascular system.
Can you help him?
I don't know that yet either.
Spock?
Yes, Captain. I get sensor readings of tri-tritanium from the alien ship's hull.
I'm sorry about your father.
Yes, it could adversely affect our mission.
Aren't you worried about him?
Worry is a human emotion, Captain. I accept what has happened. The ship's hull seems to have a high density level or is cloaked against sensor probes. It is manned, but sensors cannot make out specifics.
I see. Well, the Romulans have nothing like it. Certainly not the Federation or the neutral planets. What about the Klingons?
I think it unlikely it is one of theirs.
Who, then?
Captain? I picked up the last part of a transmission. Just like that other one. I put the recorder and the directional locator on it immediately.
Mister Chekov, directional locator indicates source bearing twenty seven, mark eight.
It's the intruder ship, sir.
Switch recorder to Mister Spock's station for decode, Lieutenant.
Sir, the directional locator indicates reception point somewhere within the body of this ship.
A personal receiver? Somebody on board is in contact with that vessel?
Possibly, Captain. But I cannot decode this transmission.
Why not?
It is in no known code. There's no detectable pattern. No standard references apply.
Are any conclusions possible from the information?
Only negative. It fits none of our computer records, and it is alien.
Murder? Someone out there playing tag? Lieutenant, you've got your sensor locator on a wide beam. You've established a receiver on board this vessel. Tighten your field to the interior of the ship.
Yes, sir.
If that alien vessel starts transmitting again, I want to know who on board the Enterprise is receiving.
Bones, how is he?
As far as I can tell from instrument readings, our prime suspect has a malfunction in one of the heart valve. It's similar to a heart attack in a human. But with Vulcan physiology, it's impossible to tell without an operation. Mrs. Sarek, has he had any previous attacks?
No.
Yes. There were three others. My physician prescribed Benjisidrine for the condition.
Why didn't you tell me?
There was nothing you could have done.
Ambassador, when did you have these attacks?
Two before we left Vulcan, the third a few hours ago. I was on the observation deck. When the Tellarite was murdered, I was quite incapacitated.
There were no witnesses?
None.
Doctor, do you propose surgery for the heart defect?
I'm not sure. It's tough enough on a human. On a Vulcan, an ordinary operation's out of the question.
Why?
Because of the construction of the Vulcan heart.
I suggest that a cryogenic open-heart procedure would be the logical approach.
Yes, unquestionably.
Bones, what about it?
Well, I'm glad somebody's asking me something around here. Well, the procedure they're discussing would require tremendous amounts of blood for the patient.
Doctor?
Yes.
I've checked the blood bank. There isn't enough Vulcan blood and plasma to even begin such an operation of this type.
There are other Vulcans aboard.
My blood type is T-negative. Somewhat rare, even for a Vulcan.
Yes, I'd say that's rare.
My blood is T-negative, Doctor.
We've run a number of blood tests on Mister Spock. It isn't true Vulcan blood either. It has human blood elements in it.
It should be possible to filter out the human factors.
Even you couldn't give that much blood, Spock. It would kill you.
Bones.
Mrs. Sarek, you must understand the chances are extremely small to find a way to produce sufficient T-negative blood.
Indeed. I would estimate the odds
Please don't.
Doctor.
I see it, Spock, but that was a Rigelian.
Rigelian physiology is very similar to Vulcan.
Similar is not good enough. It's still experimental.
But it does look promising.
Spock, we would need such great amounts of blood that, even if the drug worked on the Vulcans as well as a Rigelian, which I'm doubtful, it would still drain Sarek to a critical level.
I consider the safety factor low, but acceptable.
Plus the fact I've never operated on a Vulcan before. Oh, I've studied the anatomical types. I know where all the organs are. But that's a lot different from actual surgical experience. So if I don't kill him with the operation, the drug probably will.
What drug, Doctor? My husband is asleep. What drug?
A chemical stimulant to speed up reproduction and replacement of blood in the body. It's only experimental.
It has been used successfully on test subjects on Rigel Five.
It places a tremendous strain on the spleen and the liver. In Sarek's condition, the stimulant would kill him.
Miss Chapel? I underwent a physical examination last week. Would you pull those records, please?
Already pulled. You're perfectly healthy, Mister Spock.
What has that got
You're going to use it on yourself. A transfusion from you to your father.
It would seem the only answer.
It could damage you internally. It could kill you. I'm sorry, Spock. I can't sanction it.
And I refuse to permit it. I won't risk both of you.
Then you automatically condemn Sarek to death. And you, Doctor, have no logical alternative either. If you do not operate, Sarek will die. You now have the means to perform the operation. I am volunteering myself as the blood donor. I'll be at my station until you require me.
Bridge. Spock.
Spock here.
I'm on deck five, near my quarters. I've been attacked by an Andorian. Security. Security team.
It's a bad wound. Punctured left lung. A centimetre or so lower, it'd have gone through the heart.
I'll be in the brig questioning the Andorian prisoner.
(monitoring Sarek) Doctor, the K2 factor is dropping.
Spock, your father is much worse. There's no longer a choice. I have to operate immediately. We can begin as soon as you're prepared.
No, Doctor.
What?
My first responsibility is to the ship. Our passengers' safety is by Starfleet order of first importance. We are being followed by an alien, possibly hostile, vessel. I cannot relinquish command under these circumstances.
You can turn command over to Scotty.
On what grounds, Doctor? Command requirements do not recognise personal privilege. I'll be in the brig interrogating the Andorian.
He is Thelev, a minor member of my staff. I know nothing of him except that he has served adequately.
He has been subjected to questioning under verifier scan and truth drug. He reveals nothing. I suggest his mind has been so conditioned as part of a preconceived plan.
My people are a violent race, but we've no quarrel with Captain Kirk.
Apparently Thelev did.
You suggest a plot. How could it profit us to harm the captain?
I do not know. There is no logic in Thelev's attack upon the captain. There is no logic in Gav's murder.
Perhaps you should forget logic and devote yourself to motivations of passion or gain. Those are reasons for murder.
Come in.
Spock, you must turn command over to somebody else.
Mother, when I was commissioned, I took an oath to carry out responsibilities which were clearly and exactly specified.
Any competent officer can command this ship. Only you can give your father the blood transfusions that he needs to live.
Any competent officer can command this ship under normal circumstances. The circumstances are not normal. We're carrying over one hundred valuable Federation passengers. We're being pursued by an alien ship. We're subject to possible attack. There has been murder and attempted murder on board. I cannot dismiss my duties.
Duty? Your duty is to your father.
I know, but this must take precedence. If I could give the transfusion without loss of time or efficiency, I would. Sarek understands my reason.
Well, I don't. It's not human. That's not a dirty word. You're human, too. Let that part of you come through. Your father's dying.
Mother, how can you have lived on Vulcan so long, married a Vulcan, raised a son on Vulcan, without understanding what it means to be a Vulcan?
If this is what it means, I don't want to know.
It means to adopt a philosophy, a way of life, which is logical and beneficial. We cannot disregard that philosophy merely for personal gain, no matter how important that gain might be.
Nothing is as important as your father's life.
Can you imagine what my father would say if I were to agree, if I were to give up command of this vessel, jeopardise hundreds of lives, risk interplanetary war, all for the life of one person?
When you were five years old and came home stiff-lipped, anguished, because the other boys tormented you saying that you weren't really Vulcan. I watched you, knowing that inside that the human part of you was crying and I cried, too. There must be some part of me in you, some part that I still can reach. If being Vulcan is more important to you, then you'll stand there speaking rules and regulations from Starfleet and Vulcan philosophy, and let your father die. And I'll hate you for the rest of my life.
Mother
Oh, go to him. Now. Please.
I cannot.
Doctor McCoy?
I'd like to get my hands on the guy with the sledgehammer.
The one who hit you?
No, the one inside my head. How long have I
Now let that be a lesson to you. Just lie there and be happy you're still alive.
How's Sarek?
Not good. If I could only operate.
What's stopping you? I thought you were all ready.
I was. When you became injured, Spock assumed command. He's going to stay there until you're back on your feet, even if it costs Sarek his life. Regulations.
I can't damn him for his loyalty, for doing his duty, but I'm not going to let him commit patricide.
Jim, if you stand, you could start to bleed again.
Bones, Sarek will die without that operation, and you can't operate without transfusions from Spock. I'll convince Spock I'm all right and order him to report here. As soon as he leaves the bridge, I'll turn command over to Scotty and report to my quarters. Will that fill your prescription?
Captain?
I'll take over, Mister Spock. You report to Sickbay with Doctor McCoy.
Captain, are you quite all right?
I've certified him physically fit, Mister Spock. Now since I have an operation to perform and both of us are required
Get out, Spock. Chekov, what's the status of the intruder?
No change, sir. Maintaining its distance.
Any further transmissions, Lieutenant?
None, sir.
Call Mister Scott to the bridge.
Captain, the alien vessel is moving closer.
Belay that order. I'll stay here.
Captain, I'm picking up the alien signal again, but it's coming from inside the Enterprise.
Specific origin?
From the brig, sir.
Security? Security to the brig. Search the prisoner immediately.
Readings, Nurse.
Mister Spock's blood reproduction rate is up over two hundred percent. Sarek's heartbeat has risen to three hundred and twenty four. Blood pressure ninety over forty, dropping.
I wish I knew whether that was good or bad. Initiate sterile field.
Mister Spock.
Where do you think you're going?
I must see the captain.
My patients don't walk out in the middle of an operation.
The alien ship. I've just realised that if their power utilisation curve is not the norm, it should be possible to identify them this way. Very important.
So is your father's life.
Kirk here.
Security here. We had to stun the Andorian. He had some sort of transceiver. It was hidden in his antenna.
Captain, the alien ship has changed course and speed. Moving directly toward us at warp eight.
Bring the prisoner to the bridge. Deflectors on. Red Alert. Phasers stand by to fire on my order.
Aye, sir. Shields on. Phasers manned and ready, sir.
Chekov, take over Spock's scanners.
Aye, sir.
Target, Mister Chekov.
Moving away. Turning now. He's coming around again.
Fire as he passes, Ensign.
A clean miss, sir.
Report on his weaponry, Mister Chekov.
Sensors record standard phasers, sir.
Standard phasers. Good. They may have more speed, but they're not giants.
Captain, the intercoms are jammed. All the ambassadors are asking what's going on.
Tell them to take a good guess, but clear that board, Lieutenant.
Aye, sir.
He's coming around again.
One more like that, and I'm going to lose both these men.
Fire control locked into the computers, Captain.
On my order, fire photon torpedoes two, four and six. Widest possible scatter.
Aye, sir.
Fire.
Full spread missed, sir. They're moving too fast for us.
Doctor, his heart's stopped.
Cardio-stimulate.
The systems are off.
Then get me that old portable cardio-stimulator.
Call engineering and have sickbay systems put on priority.
Number four shield has buckled, sir.
Auxiliary power.
Switching over. Shields firming up. Number four is still weak, sir. If they hit us there again, it'll go altogether.
Your friends out there are good. They'll have to destroy this ship to win.
That was intended from the beginning, Captain.
You're not Andorian. Who are you?
Damage reports coming in, Captain. Every deck.
Damage control procedures, all decks. That ship out there has phasers. At least our weapons are alike.
Number two shield is gone.
Engineering, this is the Captain. Cut power on port side except for phaser banks. At my signal, cut starboard power. Kirk out. Who are you?
Find your own answers, Captain. You haven't long to live.
You're a spy, surgically altered to pass as an Andorian. Planted in the ambassador's party to use terror and murder to disrupt us and prepare for this attack.
Speculation, Captain.
Engineering, cut power on starboard side. Maintain until further orders. Chekov.
What are you doing?
You speculate.
We're starting to drift, sir. Shall I hold her on course?
No. Stand by your phasers, Mister Chekov.
Aye, sir. Phasers standing by. He's just hovering out there, sir.
Looking us over. We're dead as far as he knows.
You're baiting him. You're trying to lure him in.
Here he comes. Range decreasing. Speed dropping close to sublight.
Hold your fire, Mister Chekov.
Phasers locked on target. Range closing. Seventy five thousand kilometres.
Fire.
Got him!
Secure from general quarters. Lieutenant, open the hailing frequency. If they wish to surrender
They could not surrender, Captain. They had orders to self-destruct.
Lieutenant, relay to Starfleet command. Tell them we have a prisoner.
Aye, sir.
Only temporarily, Captain. You see, I had orders to self-destruct, too. Slow poison. Quite painless, actually, but there's no known antidote. I anticipate another ten minutes of life.
Take him to Sickbay.
I seem to have miscalculated.
So did they. Mister Chekov, take over.
Bones?
Are you quite through shaking the ship around?
Spock, Sarek how are they?
I don't mind telling you, you sure make it difficult for a surgeon trying
Bones!
Captain, come in.
That pig-headed Vulcan stamina. I couldn't have pulled them through without it.
Some doctors have all the luck.
Captain, I believe you'll find the alien
We damaged their ship. They destroyed themselves to avoid capture. Bones, Thelev's body will be brought to your lab. I want an autopsy performed as soon as possible.
I think you'll find he's an Orion, Doctor.
Orion?
Intelligence reports that Orion smugglers have been raiding the Coridan system.
But what would they gain by an attack on Starfleet?
Mutual suspicion and interplanetary war.
Yes, of course. With Orion carefully neutral, they'd clean up supplying dilithium to both sides and continue to raid Coridan.
The thing that confused me was the power utilisation curve. It made them seem more powerful than a starship or anything known to us. That ship was constructed for a suicide mission. Since they never intended to return to their home base, they could use one hundred percent power on their attacks. The thing I don't understand is why I didn't think of it earlier.
You might have had something else on your mind.
That hardly seems likely.
No, but thank you anyway.
And you, Sarek. Would you also say thank you to your son?
I don't understand.
For saving your life.
Spock acted in the only logical manner open to him. One does not thank logic, Amanda.
Logic, logic! I'm sick to death of logic. Do you want to know how I feel about your logic?
Emotional, isn't she?
She has always been that way.
Indeed? Why did you marry her?
At the time, it seemed the logical thing to do.
Bones. (starts to collapse.) No, no, I'm all right
If you keep arguing with your kindly family doctor, you're going to spend your next ten days right here. If you co-operate, you'll be out in two.
Doctor, I'll return to my station now.
You are at your station, Mister Spock.
Doctor McCoy, I believe you're enjoying all this.
Indeed, Captain. I've never seen him look so happy.
Shut up. (to Kirk) Shh. Shh! (to camera) Well, what do you know? I finally got the last word.
Friday's Child
They're quite large. Seven feet tall is not unusual. They're extremely fast and strong. Lieutenant?
In addition, an assortment of swords and knives.
Call from the bridge, Captain.
Bridge, Helm, sir.
Yes, Mister Sulu. Report.
Now in standard orbit, sir. I've pinpointed their encampment below.
Very good. Have the transporter room stand by.
Aye, sir.
How long were you stationed on the planet, Doctor?
Only a few months. We found them totally uninterested in medical aid or hospitals. They believe only the strong should survive.
Analysis, gentlemen.
Ordinarily, under these circumstances, I would recommend a large, well-armed landing party.
Yes, but in this case, with the more people we take down, the greater chance we have of violating one of their taboos.
Agreed. Once they've got it into their heads we're showing force, you can forget them signing any mining treaty.
Very well. Scotty, you're in command. Bear in mind that the Klingons have been sighted in this sector. While we're negotiating down there, we don't want the Enterprise to become an incident up here.
Aye, sir. We'll keep on our toes.
Halt! You are of the Earth vessel?
I'm Captain Kirk.
We come with open hearts and hands.
Grant, no!
Don't move a muscle.
I am unaware of any state of war between our peoples, Captain.
Jim!
Or is it your policy to kill Klingons on sight?
He was young, and inexperienced.
Does Maab know that the Klingons are our sworn enemies by their own words?
We understand only that he also offers things of value for our rocks, and he has freely handed us his weapons and other devices. Will you do the same?
Let me call my ship and inform them
To bring down an attack upon their village? It is as I told you, Maab. Earthmen fear to bargain honestly.
Will you hand us your weapons?
So they keep their word scrupulously. They're unusually honest. Is that what I heard you say, Doctor?
Yes, I mentioned that.
He also mentioned that they can be highly dangerous.
Dangerous if lied to, if their customs are violated. We lied to no one, Doctor. We violated no customs. Perhaps you'll explain to me why one of my men is dead.
Because he was drawing a weapon on another of their guests.
Grant looked up, saw a Klingon, made a purely instinctive defensive move. What's a Klingon doing down here among your scrupulously honest friends anyway?
Look, Jim. I know what it means to you to lose a crewman.
That's only one down, Doctor. There's over four hundred more up there in orbit. And if there's a Klingon down here, there might be a Klingon ship up there somewhere.
Mister Scott. I'm picking up something on the sensors, sir. Seems to be another ship.
Well, let's put it on the screen.
It's just at the edge of our sensor range, sir. Hard to get an exact reading.
You think it's a Klingon ship?
Who else would be playing cat and mouse with a starship? Well, they can't hurt us much out there, bobbing about like that. No need to call the captain yet.
Bones.
Yes, Captain?
I shouldn't have chewed you out. I'm sorry.
I understand.
Inefficient, however. Emotion, Captain.
Yes, you're quite right, Mister Spock. Inefficient and illogical.
You've shown friendship by handing over our weapons. She's making a gesture in return.
Jim! You touch it, her nearest male relative will have to try to kill you. They're offering you a chance for combat. They consider it more pleasurable than love.
Chur-ah.
It would appear, Captain, that he finds you a disappointment.
I am the teer Akaar. I lead the Ten Tribes of Capella.
And this is Eleen, a young wife to give an old man a son to rule these tribes.
I'm Captain Kirk. First of all, I must protest the killing of my crewman.
If it was your man, wasn't it his privilege to die for you? I do not understand.
Their customs are different, Teer.
And different from those of my people, too, Teer. The sight of death frightens them.
Let me take this, Jim. What Maab has said is true. Our customs are different. What the Klingon has said is unimportant, and we do not hear his words. I just called the Klingon a liar.
Laughter, Teer? Is not the Klingon an honoured guest also?
It was the Earth people who first bargained for our rocks.
Is it not best to have two who bargain for the same goods?
It is I who speak for the tribe, Maab.
I speak for many, Teer. Hear the words of the Klingon.
What do Earth men offer you? What have you obtained from them in the past? Powders and liquids for the sick? We Klingons believe as you do. The sick should die. Only the strong should live. Earthmen have promised to teach the youth of your tribes many things. What? What things? Cleverness against enemies? The use of weapons?
The Klingon speaks the truth, Akaar.
The Earth Federation offers one other thing, Akaar. Our laws. And the highest of all our laws states that your world is yours and will always remain yours. This differs us from the Klingons. Their empire is made up of conquered worlds. They take what they want by arms and force.
Good, good. Let the Klingons and the Earthmen offer us amusement. Capellans welcome this.
The Earth men have different customs, but never have they lied to our people.
There are those of us who won't bargain with Earthmen, Akaar.
Do you say you will fight me, Maab?
Let that be your choice, Teer.
We need our communicators, those devices on our belts. If there's a Klingon ship somewhere
The sky does not interest me. I must consider the words I have heard.
Leave him.
The ship's disappeared, sir. Gone out of range.
Mister Scott, I'm getting a call from a vessel. It's so faint I can't make it out.
Put a booster on it, Lieutenant. Try to pull it in.
I've lost it. It sounded like a distress signal from an Earth vessel.
Klingon! Communicators, weapons.
I have no quarrel with you, Captain. I wish merely to return to my vessel.
Type of vessel. Location.
A small scout ship, Captain. We need the mineral, too. I was sent to negotiate.
Release him. (Kirk does so.) Akaar is dead. I am the teer.
Kill them now.
Wait. If you lead these people now, be certain you make the right decisions.
Is the new leader of the Ten Tribes afraid? Let me kill him for you.
Or let the Klingon and me fight. It might amuse you.
Perhaps to be a teer is to see in new ways. I begin to like you, Earthman, and I saw fear in the Klingon's eye.
We had an agreement.
That too may change, Klingon.
I have the signal clear now, Mister Scott. It is a distress call. It's from the SS Dierdre.
Dierdre? That's a freighter.
Reporting they're under attack. They're running, trying to manoeuvre. It's a Klingon vessel attacking.
Helm?
Picking it up, sir. Taking a fix.
Try the captain.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, Captain.
Captain, careful.
You carry a child who would be teer.
I must die.
No!
No man may touch the wife of a teer.
She was prepared to die, Earthman.
I was proud to obey the laws. Kill him first. He laid hands upon me. It is my right to see him die.
Enterprise to Mister Spock. Doctor McCoy, come in please.
I have it on the sensors, sir. Tie into my channel, Lieutenant.
Commanding. We are under heavy attack by Klingon vessels. Two convoy ships are already damaged. We must have help. Enterprise, acknowledge. Please acknowledge. Repeat
Interception course computed and laid in, sir.
Prepare to take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu.
Aye, sir.
Scotty, the captain.
We have a distress call from a Federation ship under attack. That's where our duty lies. Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Ahead warp five.
We were forced to leave Capella to aid a Federation vessel under attack by a Klingon vessel. We were unable to contact our landing party before we were forced to answer the distress signal. Our inability to reach the landing party is strange and I am concerned.
Our check-in signal is one hour, twelve minutes overdue. Since no reconnaissance party has appeared, and since Mister Scott is notably efficient in such matters
I must assume that something's keeping them busy up there. The Klingon ship.
That would seem a logical conclusion.
Captain, I'm going to fix that woman's arm. They can only kill me once for touching her.
That's a very good idea, Bones.
Yes, Captain, an excellent idea.
Let me see that arm.
You will not touch me.
(knife at her throat) You said you're prepared to die. Does that mean you'd prefer to die? I think we can get you safely to the ship. Your choice. Bones.
To live is always desirable.
All right. Let's go.
Klingon. There's nothing to concern you there.
We made an agreement, Maab. I have a right to my weapons.
(taking a disrupter from under his cloak) We have them well cared for, Klingon. Your weapon will be returned when our business is completed. That was our agreement.
Approaching the freighter's last reported position, sir.
Sensor report, Mister Chekov.
Negative, sir. No debris, no residual particles, no traces.
Mister Sulu, begin a standard search pattern. All scanners full intensity, Mister Chekov. (to Uhura) No signal at all?
Negative, sir.
It should be on our screens by now.
At best, a freighter might travel warp two.
I'm well aware of a freighter's maximum speed, Mister Sulu.
Stay with her, Bones. Nice place to get trapped in.
But a defensible entrance, Captain.
Yes, I see. Scout up the trail that way. See what we have in the way of an exit. I'll take a look around.
Now listen, you may be a Capellan woman and the widow of a high teer, but I'm a doctor, and it's my tradition to care for the sick and injured. Now, let me see that arm.
You will not touch me in that manner.
You listen to me, young woman. I'll touch you in any way or manner that my professional judgment indicates.
Just as I thought. It can come anytime now.
How do you know?
Because I'm a doctor, that's how I know.
Even the women of our village cannot tell so much with a touch. Strange hand. Very soft.
The walls get higher and narrower, but there is a way out.
Good. If we could block off that entrance, hold them off, it'd give us more time. They'd have to go around these hills.
There is enough loose rock and shale.
Do you think we could create a sonic disruption with two of our communicators?
Only a very slight chance it would work.
Well, if you don't think we can, maybe we shouldn't try.
Captain, I didn't say that exactly.
The sound beams should produce a sympathetic vibration on the weak area of that slide.
Worried about the delivery?
Capellans aren't human, Jim. They're humanoid. There's certain internal differences. I don't have equipment to handle an emergency.
Well, if you don't think you can handle it
Forget it. I can do it. The last thing I want around is a ham-handed ship's captain.
No! Only McCoy.
There's a cave in there. Probably the only shelter around here.
I'll need help getting her in there.
No!
Look, I'm a doctor, not an escalator! Spock, give me a hand!
No! I will allow only your touch.
A vessel doesn't just disappear.
There's nothing, Mister Scott. All channels and frequencies are clear.
Mister Chekov?
Nothing, sir. If it were destroyed, I'd pick up debris readings of some sort.
It couldn't have run away from us, sir. Not a freighter.
Mister Chekov, pull the microtape on that distress call. I want it replayed.
Commanding. We are under heavy attack by Klingon vessels. Two convoy ships are already damaged. We must have help.
Did you hear it? They called us by name. Not a general distress signal, but one aimed right at us.
Wouldn't they normally call for the nearest starship?
How would a freighter know we were ordered into this sector?
A trap. We were diverted from the planet.
Or it could be an authentic distress call.
We'll stay long enough to make certain. Continue search pattern.
Yes, sir. Continuing.
Bones, you've got one of those magnesite-nitron tablets in your kit. Give me one.
Just a minute. Let me get her on the rock. There you go.
No, no. Pain is here.
How did you arrange to touch her, Bones, give her a happy pill?
No a right cross.
Never seen that in a medical book.
It's in mine from now on.
No, no. It's there. The The pain is there.
Vegetation, Captain. Evidently there's water nearby.
Good, but we need weapons just as much as we need water, Spock.
There would seem to be little weapon potential at hand.
Follow me.
No! McCoy!
Easy, easy. I'm here. Now you must want the child!
No. Here, child belongs to husband.
So they take all the credit here. Poppycock! Answer me. Do you want my help? Answer me. Do you want my help? (she nods) All right. Say to yourself, The child is mine. The child is mine. It is mine!
Yes, it's yours.
No, no. You've got it all wrong.
Yes, McCoy. It's yours.
No. Say to yourself, The child is mine. It is mine. It is
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Fortunately, this bark has suitable tensile cohesion.
You mean it makes a good bowstring.
I believe I said that.
That's more like it. Since the Capellans never developed the bow, this may come as big a surprise as gunpowder was on Earth.
No, no, Mister Spock. You place this arm under here to support its back, and this hand here to support its head.
I would rather, I would rather not. Thank you.
McCoy. Bring our child.
Our child?
I'll explain later.
That should prove very interesting.
Still negative, Mister Scott. All sweeps.
Mister Chekov?
Nothing.
We're turning back. Warp five, Helm.
Warp five, sir. On course for Capella Four.
Warp 6 as soon as she'll take it, Mister Sulu. The captain could be in trouble back there.
Mister Scott, another distress call from the USS Carolina.
Ignore it.
The Carolina is registered in this sector.
Ignore it, Lieutenant. Log it as my order, my responsibility.
Aye, aye, sir.
Scotty, if it should turn out to be real
There's an old, old saying on Earth, Mister Sulu. Fool me once, shame on you. Fool me twice, shame on me.
I know this saying. It was invented in Russia. (he smirks to himself)
Jim! Spock! Jim! Spock!
What happened, Bones?
My patient spattered me with a rock. She's gone.
The child?
It's all right. It's in there. I guess I'll forget psychiatry, stick with surgery. I really thought she'd learned to want it.
Virtue is a relative term, Doctor. She'll head straight to the warriors.
I'll go with you.
Bones, you took a medical oath long before you signed aboard my ship. That small patient in there needs you.
Estimating to planet?
Thirty one minutes, sir.
Mister Scott? Sensors picking up a vessel ahead, cutting across our path.
Sub-light one half.
Reversing to sub-light, one half.
It's an alien, sir. By configuration a Klingon warship. Taking position directly in our path.
Mister Sulu, sound battle stations.
Aye, aye, sir.
This is the USS Enterprise calling unidentified Klingon vessel. Come in. USS Enterprise calling Klingon vessel. Acknowledge, please.
I have it on the viewscreen now, sir. Still distant. Holding a position dead ahead, sir.
Drawing a line, daring us to step over it.
Still closing. The alien's directly in our line of flight.
This is the commander of the USS Enterprise. Identify yourself and your intention. Acknowledge. Close out the frequency, Lieutenant.
Phaser banks are ready, sir.
And we'll go right down their throat, if necessary. Let's see if they have the belly for it.
Behind the rocks up there.
The Earthmen make excellent game. Their cleverness has surprised me.
(slightly out of breath) They must die. That is your law.
We will honour our law, and our word to you, Klingon.
Maab.
The child is dead, Maab. Do as you will with me.
The Earthmen?
Dead. I killed them as they slept.
If true, take us to them.
Do you doubt my word, Klingon? I'm the wife of a teer. I will die in my own tent.
It is in order. She is the wife of a teer. (Kras runs off.) No!
First, we'll verify her story.
Is this what your sworn word means, Klingon?
Spock. Spock!
Here, Captain. Over here, Captain. (into communicator as Kirk joins him.) Spock to Enterprise.
The cavalry doesn't come over the hill in the nick of time anymore.
If by that you mean we can't expect help from the Enterprise, I must agree.
Naam.
There's just one thing I want.
The Klingon?
One of us must get him.
Revenge, Captain?
Why not?
The next man who raises a weapon destroys all of you. You and your primitive knives and your weapons, I'll teach you what killing really means.
Klingon!
Fight! Are you warriors or children? Maab, I will flee. When the Klingon turns to fire, I'll
(drawing his knife) As teer of the Ten Tribes, I give you back your life. Mine is now forfeit. Keel, stand ready.
Klingon!
Hold it there. Drop your weapons.
We missed you, Mister Scott.
Well sir, we had a wee bit of a run-in with a Klingon vessel, but he had no stomach for fighting. We checked the encampment, found out you were here, and had no trouble at all in tracking you down. I could
No, that's not the way to handle it. Here, like this. Here, take his little head like that. There, arm in a. That's it. See how easy? Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. Oochy-woochy coochy-coo.
Oochy-woochy coochy-coo, Captain?
An obscure Earth dialect, Mister Spock. Oochy-woochy coochy-coo. If you're curious, consult linguistics.
Well, at any rate, this should prove interesting.
Interesting?
When the woman starts explaining how the new high teer is actually Doctor McCoy's child.
What's that again, Mister Spock?
We don't actually understand it ourselves, Mister Scott.
Nor does Doctor McCoy.
Contact Starfleet. Inform them the Federation mining rights on Capella have been secured by treaty, documents signed by the young high chief's regent. Report follows.
Aye, aye, sir.
The child's regent?
Yes, Eleen. Remarkable young lady.
Representing the high teer, Leonard James Akaar.
The child was named Leonard James Akaar?
Has a kind of a ring to it, don't you think, James?
Yes. I think it's a name destined to go down in galactic history, Leonard. What do you think, Spock?
I think you're both going to be insufferably pleased with yourselves for at least a month, sir.
Take us out of orbit, Mister Sulu. Ahead warp factor one.
The Deadly Years
Where is everyone?
Perhaps they weren't expecting us.
Our arrival was scheduled well in advance, Doctor. The annual check of every scientific expedition is routine.
I had a subspace contact with a Robert Johnson, the leader of this expedition, an hour ago.
Did he report anything wrong?
No, yet there was something wrong. I can't pin it down. His conversation was disjointed, his thoughts a little foggy, unrelated. Chekov, check that building. Mister Spock and I will check this one. The rest of you, take a look around. See if you can find anyone.
Captain! Captain! Captain! Captain!
What is it?
A man, sir. In there. A dead man.
Well?
Exactly what it looks like. Death by natural causes. Old age.
Quite impossible, Doctor. I ran a personnel check on this expedition before we beamed down. I assure you that none of them were
I'm Captain Kirk of
You'll have to speak louder.
I say I'm Captain Kirk of the USS Enterprise. Who are you?
I'm Robert Johnson. This is my wife, Elaine.
How old are you? How old are you?
I'm, er, let me see. I am twenty nine, and Elaine is
Mister Johnson, can you hear me?
I can hear you. Not deaf yet, you know. Not yet.
Can you tell me what happened?
What happened?
Did your instruments show anything?
Elaine was so beautiful. So beautiful. So beautiful.
He can hear you, Jim, but he doesn't understand. Let's let him rest.
(to nurse) If they seem lucid, I'll be in the briefing room.
Stay seated. Commodore Stocker, I've asked you to be part of this briefing because Gamma Hydra Four falls in your administrative area.
I appreciate that, sir.
Doctor Wallace, as an expert in endocrinology, I'd appreciate you working very closely Doctor McCoy.
(a young blonde woman in a pink dress) Yes, Captain.
Doctor McCoy, would you fill them in?
The expedition is suffering from extreme old age, and they're growing older by the minute. Much older. My examinations have turned up absolutely nothing. In fact, I don't have a clue.
What about the atmosphere and environment, Mister Spock?
Sensors reveal nothing which is inimical to human life. The atmosphere screens out the usual amount of harmful cosmic rays.
We're close to the neutral Zone between our Federation and the Romulan empire. It's possible the Romulans have a new weapon and are using this colony as guinea pigs.
I have already begun investigation into that possibility, Captain.
Good. I want you all to check out everything in your own departments. No matter how remote, how far-fetched the notion, I want it run down. We'll stay in orbit until we have the answer.
I'm sure you understand that I'm anxious to get to Starbase Ten to assume my new post.
Yes, Commodore. We'll do everything we can to make sure you make your duty.
Thank you, sir.
Doctor, is there something I can do for you?
Well, be a little less the cool, efficient Captain and a little more the old friend.
How long has it been?
Six years, four months, and an odd number of days. You mean you don't know?
Well, it's been a long time. Things wouldn't change if it started all over again, would it? You have your job, I have my ship, and neither one of us will change.
You said it. I didn't. In all those years, I only heard from you once. A stargram when my husband died. You know, you never asked me why I got married after we called it off.
Well, I supposed that you met someone you loved.
I met a man I admired. A great man.
And in your field as you. You didn't give up a thing.
No. Just you.
Captain Kirk, Mister Spock would like to see you on the Bridge.
I'm on my way.
Standard orbit, Captain.
Maintain.
I've rechecked the sensors, Captain. Gamma Hydra Four checks out as a Class M planet with a conventional oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere and normal mass. I can find nothing at all out of the ordinary.
What about the comet that astrophysics reported?
We're checking it on it. I've reached no conclusions as yet. The comet was a rogue and has never been investigated.
Captain Kirk?
Yes, Commodore.
Facilities at Starbase Ten are much more complete than those on board ship. It seems to me that your investigations would be facilitated if we proceeded there. I assure you all co-operation.
Thank you. You're anxious to get to the base, but we have a few facilities of our own here. I think the Enterprise will do quite nicely. I'll be in engineering, Mister Spock. Maintain standard orbit, Mister Sulu.
You already gave that command, sir.
Oh? Well, follow it.
Lieutenant Galway.
(a petite woman) Doctor, may I speak to you for a moment, please?
Of course. Go right ahead.
I know this is going to sound foolish, but I seem to be having a little trouble hearing.
It's probably nothing important.
I never had trouble before.
Well, don't worry about it. Perhaps a little hypersonic treatment might clear it up.
Thank you.
Progress report, Mister Spock.
All research lines negative, Captain.
Astronomical section reports that a comet recently passed by. Check into that.
I'm doing that, Captain, as per your previous order. We discussed that earlier.
Oh, yes. Let me know what you come up with. I'll be in the Sickbay.
Acknowledged.
The last one. Robert Johnson. Cause of death, old age.
You did what you could.
Which adds up to absolutely nothing.
Doctor McCoy, this is Scott. May I come see you?
All you need are vitamins, but you can come up anyhow.
Bones, I believe you're getting grey.
You take over my job and see what happens to you.
I see what you mean.
What's your problem, Jim?
Shoulder. Just a twinge. Probably muscular strain.
You're probably right, Doctor. By the way, I don't like how you've been running this ship lately.
All right. Reprimand received. Go ahead.
Jim, I think we better'd run a complete physical on you.
Why? Just muscular strain, isn't it?
No, Jim. It's advanced arthritis, and it's spreading.
That's impossible.
I can run it through again, but I'll come up with the same thing.
Scotty!
Report, Bones.
All of us who went down to the surface, with the exception of Chekov, are aging at various rates. Approximately thirty years for each day. I don't know what's causing it. A virus, a bacteria, or evil spirits, but I'm trying to find out.
Spock, could I ask for some figures?
(looking about the same as usual) Based on what Doctor McCoy gave me, I estimate that physically we each have less than a week to live. Also, since our mental faculties are aging faster than our bodies, we will be little better than mental vegetables in considerably lesser time.
Total senility?
Yes, Captain. In a very short time.
What a way to die. All right. I want all the research facilities, all the scientific technicians, to start round-the-clock research immediately. I want the answers, and I want the remedy. Let's start by finding out why Chekov hasn't been affected.
I'm doing what I can. (to Spock) You're perfectly healthy.
(sitting up) I must differ with you, Doctor. I'm having difficulty concentrating, which is most disturbing, my eye sight appears to be failing, and the normal temperature of the ship seems to me to be increasingly cold.
I did not say you weren't affected, Mister Spock. You are perfectly healthy, that is, for any normal Vulcan on the high side of a hundred.
Captain, can I go back to my station?
You feel up to it?
Of course I do. I just need a wee bit of rest, that's all.
You can leave, too, Lieutenant Galway. Lieutenant Galway?
What? You spoke to me, Doctor?
Yes, I spoke to you. I said that you could leave, too. Now why don't you go down to your quarters and get some sleep.
No. I don't want to sleep. Can't you understand? If I sleep, what will I find when I wake up?
Lieutenant Galway, assume your position. Start your duties.
Thank you, sir. (on her way out) What a stupid place to hang a mirror.
She's ten years younger than I am, and she looks,
People age normally at different speeds, Jim.
Why hasn't he aged?
I don't know.
Well I want to know! Is it his youth, his blood type, his heritage, his glands, his genes?
His genes. All right, nurse. Prepare Chekov for another complete physical.
Come along, Ensign. This won't hurt. Much.
Promises.
A few years ago on Aldebaran Three, my husband and I tried various carbohydrate compounds to slow down the degeneration of plant life.
Then try that, Doctor Wallace. Try anything, but do it quickly.
Yes, sir. (leaves)
I'll be on the Bridge. Keep me posted as to Chekov.
I thought you were on your way to the biochemistry lab, Doctor.
We both go in the same direction.
So we do.
Look, we know the problem. We know the progress of the affliction. Therefore, once we find the proper line of research, it's only logical we find the solution.
You sound like my first officer.
No problem is insoluble. Not even ours.
That didn't spring from logic.
Our situation doesn't have its roots in logic. The heart is not a logical organ. When I married Theodore Wallace, I thought I was over you. I was wrong.
When did you realise that? Today?
What?
How much older was your husband than you?
What difference does that make?
Answer me.
Twenty six years.
That's quite a difference.
Jim, he was a brilliant man. We were stationed on a lonely outpost. We were working together. I don't want to talk about him. I want to talk about us.
Look at me. Look at me. What do you see?
I see Captain James Kirk, a man of morality, decency, handsome, and strong.
And old. And rapidly growing older.
Jim, please.
What are you offering me, Jan? Love, or a going away present?
Give us some more blood, Chekov. The needle won't hurt, Chekov. Take off your shirt, Chekov. Roll over, Chekov. Breathe deeply, Chekov. Blood sample, Chekov. Marrow sample, Chekov. Skin sample, Chekov. If I live long enough, I'm going to run out of samples.
You'll live.
Oh, yes. I'll live, but I won't enjoy it.
Maintaining standard orbit, Captain.
Increase orbit to twenty thousand perigee, Mister Sulu.
Aye, aye, sir.
(a blonde yeoman) Will you sign this, sir?
Yeoman. (picks the pen up) You have a reason for being on the Bridge, Commodore Stocker?
I'd hoped for a few words with you at your convenience.
I have very little time.
If I may say so sir, we have a due date at Starbase Ten.
We're going to be late. I don't intend to leave this area until we've found the solution for this problem.
Captain, I'm watching four very valuable and one almost irreplaceable members of the Starfleet failing before my eyes. I want to do something to help.
Yes, yes. If you're so concerned, I'll send a message to Starbase Ten.
Captain, you sent such a message this morning.
Yeoman? Where's that
Sir?
Fuel consumption report?
I gave it to you. You signed it.
If I'd signed it, I wouldn't have asked for it, now would l?
Your signature, Captain.
Captain, I believe (notices, and wakes him gently) Captain. Captain.
Mister Spock. I was just thinking.
Yes, sir. Quite understandable.
You have something to report?
Yes, sir. We have the cause of the affliction.
What is it?
The orbit of Gamma Hydra Four carried the planet directly through the comet's trail. On conventional radiation settings, we discovered nothing. On resetting our sensors to the extreme lower range of the scale, undetected radiation appeared. Below normal radiation levels but definitely present, and undoubtedly residue from the comet.
Good, Spock. Well done. Let's get this to Doctor McCoy immediately. Oh. Lieutenant, take a message to Starfleet Command. Due to the proximity of the Romulans, you'd better use Code two.
But, Captain, the Romulans have broken Code two. If you remember the last bulletin
Then use Code three.
Yes, sir. Code three.
Message. Key to affliction may be comet which passed by Gamma Hydra Four. Said comet is now,
(consulting PADD) Quadrant four four eight, sir.
Quadrant. All units are to be alerted for complete analysis of radiation and means found to neutralise it. Comet is highly dangerous. Kirk, commanding Enterprise. Immediately, Lieutenant. Let's go.
Aye, sir.
Oh, Mister Sulu. Increase orbit to twenty thousand mile perigee.
You mean another twenty thousand, Captain?
I fail to understand why each one of my commands is being questioned. Now do as you're told, Mister Sulu.
Mister Sulu, what is our present position?
Orbiting at twenty thousand, sir.
Maintain.
Maintaining, sir.
Radiation? That's as good an answer as any, but why didn't we know about it earlier?
Possibly, Doctor, because my thinking processes are not as efficient as before.
(to Wallace) Run this through, Doctor.
All right, Bones, I'm going up to the Bridge. Keep me posted. Spock?
I have a question for the doctor. (Kirk leaves) Doctor, the ship's temperature is increasingly uncomfortable for me. I've adjusted the environment in my quarters to one hundred twenty five degrees, which is at least tolerable. However, I
Well, I see I'm not going to be making any house calls on you.
I wondered if perhaps there was something which could lower my sensitivity to cold.
I'm not a magician, Spock, just an old country doctor.
Yes. As I always suspected. (leaves)
Doctor McCoy, none of our usual radiation therapies will have any effect on this radiation sickness.
Well, then we just start over, that's all. We work harder, faster, and we start completely from scratch if we have to. But we find something.
Spock, can I have a word with you?
Commodore?
Mister Spock, a starship can function with a Chief Engineer, a Chief Medical Officer, even a First Officer under physical par. But it's disastrous to have a commanding officer whose condition is any less than perfection.
I am aware of that.
Please understand me. My admiration for Captain Kirk is unbounded. He is a great officer. But Mister Spock, I need your help and your co-operation.
For what, sir?
I would like you to take over command of the Enterprise.
On what grounds, Commodore?
On the grounds that the captain, because of his affliction, is unable to perform his duties.
Need I remind you, sir, that I too have contracted the same affliction?
Yes, but you're a Vulcan. You have a much greater life span. You show the affects to a much smaller degree.
I'm half human, sir. My physical reflexes are down, my mental capacity is reduced. I tire easily. No, sir. I am not fit for command.
Well, if you are not, with your Vulcan physique, then obviously Captain Kirk cannot be.
Sir, I do have duties to perform.
Mister Spock. I do not like what I'm about to say but regulations demand it. And as a Starfleet flag officer, I must follow regulations. As second in command of the Enterprise, you must convene an extraordinary competency hearing.
I resist that suggestion, Commodore.
It's not a matter of choice. When a captain is unfit, physically or mentally, a competency hearing is mandatory. Please don't make me quote a regulation which you know as well as I do.
Very well, sir. The hearing shall convene at fourteen hundred hours.
Now this isn't going to hurt a bit.
That's what you said the last time.
Did it hurt?
Yes.
Doctor.
Bones.
She's dead. Her metabolism caused her to age more rapidly than the rest of us, but the same thing's going to happen to us unless
How long have we got, Bones?
Oh, a matter of days. Perhaps hours.
Let it read that this competency hearing was ordered by Commodore Stocker and reluctantly called by myself.
Let it also read that I consider it invalid.
Mister Spock, may I make a statement? I have had to resort to these legal grounds in order to save the lives of some very valuable members of the Starfleet. I have tried to convince Captain Kirk of the necessity of proceeding to Starbase Ten, but I've been overruled in each case. The responsibility of this hearing is mine.
On the contrary, Commodore. As presiding officer and as second in command of the Enterprise, the responsibility is mine. Captain Kirk, would you like to make a statement?
Yes, I would like to make a statement. I am the captain of this ship and am totally capable of commanding her. Let's call this whole thing off and get back to work.
It is quite impossible, Captain. The regulations are quite specific. You are entitled to direct examination of all witnesses immediately after the board has questioned them.
Very kind of you, Spock.
Mister Sulu, how long have you served with Captain Kirk?
Two years, sir.
To your knowledge, has he ever had any difficulty making decisions?
No, sir.
Did he order you to maintain standard orbit around Gamma Hydra Four?
Yes, sir.
Did he not, several minutes later, repeat that order?
Yes, sir.
Did he order you to increase orbit?
Yes, sir.
Did he not several minutes later repeat that order?
He did not. When I give an order, I expect it to be obeyed. I don't have to repeat myself.
Mister Sulu, please answer the question.
Yes, sir. Captain Kirk repeated his order.
Thank you, Mister Sulu. Yeoman Atkins, you handed Captain Kirk a fuel consumption report in the presence of witnesses, which he read and signed. Is that correct?
Sir, he had more important things on his mind.
Yeoman, you will simply answer the question.
I, I guess he forgot he'd signed it.
You guess?
He'd forgot he'd signed it.
Thank you, Yeoman. You may leave. Lieutenant Uhura. I have here a bulletin from Starfleet Command which states that the Romulans have broken Code two. Are these your initials which appear at the bottom?
They are.
And whose initials are those which appear directly below yours?
Those of Captain Kirk.
Did Captain Kirk ask you to send a message about the comet which passed Gamma Hydra Four?
He did.
Using Code two.
Oh, yes, but he changed it to Code three.
After you reminded him that the Romulans had broken Code two.
Yes.
Thank you, Lieutenant. Doctor McCoy, Doctor McCoy!
(waking up) Yes, Spock? What is it?
Several hours ago, at the request of this board, you ran a complete physical examination of Captain Kirk.
I did.
Medical banks, compute described subject's physical age, using established norms as comparative base.
Working. Subject's physical age based on physiological profile, between sixty and seventy two. Aging rapidly.
No, I'm thirty four. I'm thirty four years old.
The computer differs with you, Captain.
Doctor McCoy.
Yes.
Will you give us your professional evaluation of Captain Kirk's present physical condition.
Captain Kirk is suffering from a, a peculiar physical degeneration which strongly resembles aging.
Is not his mental capacity degenerating even more rapidly?
Yes, yes, but he's a better man right now
Doctor, you heard the computer's analysis of Captain Kirk's physical age. Do you agree with it?
It's a blasted machine, Spock! You can't argue with a machine.
Do you agree with it, Doctor?
Yes. Yes, I do, agree. And I am sorry, Jim.
This board has no further questions. Unless you, Commodore Stocker, have something that you would like to add.
No. I am quite satisfied, Mister Spock.
Do you wish to call any witnesses, Captain Kirk?
I am perfectly capable of speaking in my own defence, Mister Spock.
Captain, I would suggest
No, no, no. It's all right, Spock. It's all right. There's only one reason, and one reason alone, for having this, hearing. I refused to leave Gamma Hydra Two
Gamma Hydra Four, Captain.
Yes. A slip of the tongue.
You're inability to remember having given commands, reading and signing important orders and then forgetting them, your physical analysis as compiled by our own chief surgeon. All these things would appear to be irrefutable proof of failing physical and mental conditions.
So I'm a little confused. Who wouldn't be at a time like this? My ship's in trouble, my senior officers are ill. And this nonsense about a competency hearing is enough to mix up any man. Trying to relieve a captain of his command is, well, that's, that's. Spock, I wouldn't have believed it of you. Go ahead. Ask me questions. I'll show you what I'm capable of. There's nothing wrong with my memory. Go ahead! Ask me anything! We're in orbit around Gamma Hydra Two, right? Anyhow, it doesn't matter. There's a lot more to running a starship than answering a lot of fool questions. A lot more. Go ahead. Ask me questions.
We have no more questions, Captain.
Ask me anything. Anything.
There'll be no more questions, Captain. If you would leave the room so the board can vote
Good idea. Get this stupid voting over with so I can get back to running the ship. The most fool thing I ever heard of. Competency hearing when there's work to be done. I'll be in my quarters, awaiting your decision. (leaves)
Well, since the senior officers are incapable and I am of flag rank, I am forced by regulations to assume command.
Sir, you have never commanded a starship.
What would you have, a junior officer with far less experience than I have?
The danger from the Romulans
Mister Spock, we have to save these people. Mister Sulu, set a direct course for Starbase Ten. Warp five.
Across the Neutral Zone?
Immediately, Mister Sulu. All officers are to return to their posts.
Spock?
Yes, Captain.
So, I've been relieved.
I'm sorry, Captain.
Yes. You should've been a prosecuting attorney.
Regulations require
Regulations. Don't give me regulations. You've wanted command all along. First little excuse you get
Captain, I have not assumed command.
I hope you're proud of. What do you mean, you've not assumed command?
I suffer the same affliction as you, sir.
If you're not in command, who is?
Commodore Stocker.
Stocker? Are you crazy? He's never had a field command.
Mister Scott was unfit for command. Commodore Stocker is ranking officer
No! Don't talk to me about rank! The man's a chair-bound paper-pusher. I order you to take command.
I cannot, Captain.
Are you refusing a direct order?
No, sir. Only Commodore Stocker can give a command order onboard this ship.
You traitorous, disloyal, you stab me in the back the first chance you get? Spock. Get out. I never want to have to look at you again.
Jan, Jan.
Oh, Jim. I'm sorry. Truly I am.
I made a fool of myself in there. I shouldn't have let them confuse me, rattle me.
Everybody understood.
But I'm not old, Jan. I'm not. A few muscular aches doesn't make a man old. And you don't run a starship with your arms. You run it with your head. My brain's as sharp as it ever was. A simple case of radiation poisoning, and they relieve me of my command. I admit I'm getting a little grey, but radiation will do that to you.
Oh, Jim, will you forgive me? I have work to do.
Jan, you know me. Look at me closely. Tell me. Am I getting old?
What are you doing here?
It would seem to be the place where I can be of the most use.
Maybe you'd like to relieve Doctor McCoy. What about Chekov?
Nothing. Absolutely nothing.
Bones, there has to be. There has to be. We beamed down together. We were on the surface together. The same spot. We were together all the time.
No, not all the time. Captain, he left us for a few moments.
He left us? He left us. He went into the building. Spock, something happened.
Yes. Yes, indeed, Captain. Doctor, you remember
He was scared! He saw the dead body and he ran out of the building and he was scared to death.
Yes, yes. Now that could be. Right. Scared. Heart beats faster, breathe gets short, and there's cold sweats and adrenaline flows. Adrenal activity. Now hold on Just a minute. There was something that I read once. It was ancient history, just after the atomic age. Used for radiation sickness. Adrenaline.
Doctor, hyronalin is the specific accepted for all radiation sickness.
Yes, yes. Now. But before, adrenaline. Highly promising. Early research, but they abandoned it when hyronalin was discovered.
Quite possible, Doctor. Perhaps a sufficiently efficacious compound could be developed.
Don't just stand there jawing, Spock. You and Doctor Wallace get cracking.
Entering Romulan Neutral Zone, sir. All sensors on maximum.
Thank you, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant Uhura, let me know if we contact any Romulan.
I think we just made contact, sir.
Romulans approaching from both sides. We're bracketed, sir.
Engineering wants instructions, sir.
Commodore Stocker, what are your orders? Commodore! (But he is transfixed by the sight of another weapon blast heading for them on the viewscreen.)
I'm going up to the bridge.
No, Jim. You can't do it.
I have to go to the bridge. We're under attack.
Nurse? Doctor Wallace!
Let me go.
Nurse. 
Jim.
Easy, Captain.
We're under attack. I have to go to the Bridge. I've got to go to the bridge.
Keep trying to raise the Romulans.
I'm trying, Commodore.
If I could talk to them, explain to them why we violated the Neutral Zone.
The Romulans are notorious for not listening to explanations.
Lieutenant Uhura is right, sir. We've tangled with them before.
Greenhorn, up there ruining my ship.
Jim, if I have to give you a shot
Jim-boy, you just lay quiet. You can't do no good. We're both through.
No. No. My ship. My ship.
Doctor, I made the necessary computations and produced this serum. It is crude and dangerous, but we have no time for refinements.
All right. Let's, let's go.
It could cure or kill, Doctor.
Don't give me any Vulcan details. Just give me the shot.
No. I'll take the first shot.
You can't.
How long do you think this ship can take the pounding? I've got to get up there.
Jim, it could kill you.
I'll die anyway. Do it.
Doctor Wallace, give him the shot.
Quickly. Quickly.
Sir, they've fired another.
Well, well, what's happening?
The ageing process has stopped. His bodily functions are getting stronger.
Sir, I've tried all known hailing frequencies. They simply ignore us.
Opinion, Mister Sulu.
They know they have us. They know our shields will give out.
Well then, we have no alternative but to surrender.
Sir, the Romulans do not take captives.
We're losing power, sir.
What am I going to do? I've got to do something.
Report, Mister Sulu.
We're surrounded by Romulan vessels. Maximum of ten. Range fifty to a hundred thousand kilometres.
Engineering, this is the captain. I want full emergency power. I want everything within about two minutes. I want the warp drive engines on full standby. Kirk out. Open up a special channel to Starfleet Command. Code two.
But, Captain, Code
That's an order, Lieutenant. Code two.
Yes, Captain. Code two.
Message. From Enterprise to Starfleet Command this sector. Have inadvertently encroached upon Romulan Neutral Zone. Surrounded and under heavy Romulan attack. Escape impossible, shields failing. Will implement destruct order using corbomite device recently installed. Since this will result in the destruction of the Enterprise and all matter in a two hundred thousand kilometre diameter and establish a corresponding dead zone, all Federation ships will avoid this area for the next four solar years. Explosion will take place in one minute. Kirk, commanding Enterprise, out. Mister Sulu, course one eight eight degrees, mark fourteen. Speed, warp factor eight. Stand by.
Standing by, sir.
Romulans giving ground, Captain. Obviously, they tapped in as you expected them to.
A logical assumption, Mister Spock. Are they still retreating?
Yes, sir.
Good. All hands, stand by. Warp factor eight, now.
The Romulans were caught off guard, Captain. They're falling behind.
Are we out of range, Mister Sulu?
Yes, sir. And out of the Neutral Zone.
Secure from Red Alert. Adjust a new course, two five seven degrees, mark three. Heading for Starbase Ten.
Two five seven degrees, mark three.
Captain, I just wanted to assure you that I did what I thought best to save you and the men.
Noted. You should know, however, that there's very little a Starbase can do that a starship can't.
If I may say so, Captain, I am now quite aware of what a starship can do with the right man at the helm.
You're looking good, Doc.
Feeling fine. So is Scotty. The serum worked. He pulled a muscle during the reaction, but otherwise he's feeling fine.
And yourself?
Oh, very well. A few bruises here and there. Oh. Anytime you're ready, Mister Spock.
I am quite ready now, Doctor.
Because of your Vulcan physique, I have prepared an extremely potent shot for you. However, you might like to know I've removed all the breakables from Sickbay.
That is very considerate of you, Doctor.
I thought you'd be pleased to hear that.
Well, gentlemen, all and all, an experience we'll remember in our old age. Which won't be for some while, I hope. Take over, Mister Sulu. Steady as she goes.
Steady as she goes, Captain.
I thought I said that.
Obsession
Our scanner survey was correct, Captain. There it is. Pure tritanium.
Fantastic. 20 times as hard as diamond.
Twenty one point four times as hard, to be exact.
Thank you, Mister Spock. (into communicator) Scotty, you can mark this vein as confirmed. Inform Starfleet I recommend that they dispatch a survey vessel immediately.
Acknowledged, Captain. They'll send one fast enough for this rich a find.
We won't be able to break it, Captain. I'll phaser off a specimen.
Lesley.
Do you smell that? A sweet odour like honey. It was years ago, on another planet. A thing with a an odour like that.
We're in the growing season in this hemisphere of this planet. There are doubtless many pollen aromas.
Rizzo.
Yes, sir?
Take your men. Make a swing around our perimeter. Scan for dikironium in the atmosphere. Set your phasers on disrupter-B. If you see any gaseous cloud, fire immediately. You're on Red Alert. Make a sweep.
Ready to beam back aboard, Captain?
Negative, Scotty. We're checking something out.
The USS Yorktown is expecting to rendezvous with us in less than eight hours, Captain. That doesn't give us much time.
Acknowledged. Continue standing by. Kirk out.
Captain, dikironium exists only in laboratory experiments.
It's gone. I could have been wrong. The last time I caught an odour like that was eleven years ago.
Seemed to read dikironium for a minute, and then I lost it. It's almost like something out there knows I'm scanning it. It kind of keeps changing itself into something different. That isn't possible. Nothing can do that.
Captain?
Kirk here.
Captain.
There's a strange cloud, sir.
Cloud, cloud.
Fire into it immediately!
Help me. Help!
Spock. Dead. And you'll find every red corpuscle gone from their body.
Rizzo's alive, barely.
Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, lock in on us. Medical emergency.
You think you know what it was, Captain?
Something that can't possibly exist, but it does.
Autopsy report, Doctor.
How's Ensign Rizzo?
Still unconscious, sir.
Transfusions?
Continuing as rapidly as possible. His blood count is still sixty percent less than normal. (leaves)
Kirk to bridge.
Spock here. Ready to leave orbit, Captain.
Hold your position.
Cutting in if I may, Captain. The USS Yorktown is expecting to rendezvous with us in less than seven hours.
Then you'll inform them that we might be a little late.
Jim, the Yorktown's ship surgeon will want to know how late. Those vaccines he's transferring to us are highly perishable.
Spock again, Captain. Those medical supplies are badly needed on planet Theta Seven. They are expecting us to get them there on time.
Gentlemen, we are remaining in orbit until I find out more about those deaths, on my responsibility. I am perfectly aware that it might cost lives on Theta Seven. Kirk out. Autopsy report.
You saw their colour. There wasn't a red corpuscle left in their bodies.
Marks, cuts, incisions of any kind?
Not a one. What happened is medically impossible.
I suggest you look at the record tapes of past similar occurrences. You'll find the USS Farragut lists casualties eleven years ago from exactly the same impossible causes.
Thank you, Captain. I'll check those tapes immediately.
First, can you bring Ensign Rizzo to consciousness for a moment?
Yes, but it
Will it hurt him if you do so?
In his present condition, I don't think it would make much difference.
Then do so.
Transfusion completed, sir. His pulse and respiration are still far below normal.
Give him one cc of cordazine, nurse.
Yes, sir.
Rizzo. This is the captain. Can you hear me? Do you remember what happened to you?
Remember. I'm cold. I'm so cold.
You were attacked by something. When it happened, did you notice an odour of any kind? Rizzo. Rizzo! Do you remember a sickly sweet odour? Did you smell it?
Yes. Yes. A smell. A strange smell. It was like being smothered in honey.
Did you feel a presence, an intelligence?
It was trying to draw strength from us. I felt it. It was, it was, it was there.
He's beginning to sleep again. I can't risk another shot.
He's already told me what I wanted to know.
I wouldn't depend too much what he says in that half-conscious state. He could be dreaming, saying what he thought you wanted to hear.
You check those record tapes. I want your medical analysis as quickly as possible. (leaves)
What's with the captain? I've never seen him like that before.
I intend to find out. I'll be in the medical record library.
Oh, Captain. Subspace message from Starfleet. They're inquiring
Not now. Have the security duty officer report to me immediately.
Aye, sir.
Spock?
Continuing scanning. Still no readings of life forms on the planet.
Let's assume that it's something so completely different that our sensors wouldn't identify it as a life form.
You mentioned dikironium, Captain.
Suppose it was composed of that rare element. A strange, gaseous creature.
I've scanned for that element, Captain. There's no trace of dikironium on the planet surface or in the atmosphere.
Suppose it camouflaged itself. Let's assume that it's intelligent, that it knows we're looking for it.
To hide from a sensor scan, it would have to be able to change its molecular structure, like gold changing itself to lead or wood changing itself to ivory.
You've just suggested something that never occurred to me. It may provide some answers to a tape record which I think you'll find Doctor McCoy is looking at this very moment.
Chekov, take over on scanner.
Ensign Garrovick reporting, sir.
Are you the new security officer?
Yes, sir.
Was your father
Yes, sir, but I don't expect any special treatment on that account.
You'll get none aboard this ship, Mister.
Yes, sir.
Captain, I have a report on Ensign Rizzo. He's dead, sir.
You knew Rizzo?
Yes, sir. We were good friends, graduated the Academy together.
You'll get a crack at what killed him. Interested?
Yes, I am, sir.
I want four men armed with phaser two set for disrupter effect. Join me in the transporter room in five minutes. You'll accompany me to the planet surface.
Yes, sir.
Reading is changing, sir.
Spock was right. Notice the molecular shift? 
Dikironium reading now, sir. Bearing ninety four mark seven, angle of elevation six degrees. Holding steady.
Over that rise. Take two men, circle around to the left. I'll take the other two and go the other way. That creature is dangerous. If you see it, fire full phasers.
Yes, sir.
Swensen, Bardoli come with me.
A phaser! Come on! (arriving at the scene) Garrovick, did you?
Mister Garrovick, we've studied your report. Mister Spock, begin.
What was the size of the thing you saw, Ensign?
I'd say it measured from ten to sixty cubic metres, sir. It varied in size, fluctuated as it moved.
Composition?
It was like a, a gaseous cloud. Parts of it I could see through. Other parts were more dense.
Ensign, did you sense any intelligence in this gaseous cloud?
Did I what, sir?
Did you get any subconscious impressions that this was a creature. A living, thinking thing, rather than just a strange cloud of chemical elements?
No, sir.
But you didn't come to actual contact with it, did you?
No, sir. I was furthest away from it. It seemed to come out of nowhere, hovered for a moment, then moved toward my men. It was fast, incredibly fast.
Did you say it hovered?
Yes, sir.
You did fire at it, didn't you?
Yes, sir, I did.
What distance were you from the creature?
About twenty yards, sir.
You fired at a large, hovering target at that distance and missed?
Yes. I, er, well, I didn't fire while it was hovering, sir.
You mean you froze?
No, sir. I didn't exactly freeze.
What exactly were you doing?
Well, I was startled for a second. And then by the time I fired, the thing was already moving.
Do you have any further information?
No, sir.
Do you gentlemen have any further questions?
I only hesitated for a moment, sir. I'm sorry.
Ensign, you're relieved of all duties and confined to quarters until further notice.
Yes, sir. (leaves)
You were a little hard on the boy, Jim.
He froze. One man was killed. Another may die.
Captain, scientifically
You'll both be filing reports. Make your comments and recommendations then.
Captain, while we're waiting I've taken the liberty of cleaning the radioactive disposal vent on number two impulse engine, but we'll be ready to leave orbit in under half an hour.
We're not leaving orbit, Mister Scott. Not that quickly.
Captain, the Yorktown requesting information on how soon we expect to rendezvous with them.
Thank you.
The medicine for Theta Seven colony is not only needed desperately and has limited
I'm aware of the situation, Engineer, and I'm getting a little tired of my senior officers conspiring against me. Forgive me. Perhaps I shouldn't have used the word conspire.
Agreed, sir.
Scanner readings?
Nothing, sir. Continuing to scan.
Are you aware it can change its molecular structure?
Yes, sir.
Are you scanning for any unusual movement?
Yes, sir.
Any type of gaseous cloud?
We've run a full scanner probe twice.
Then run it twenty times if that's what it takes!
I hope I'm not disturbing you, Doctor.
Interrupting another autopsy report is no disturbance, Mister Spock. It's a relief.
I need your advice.
Then I need a drink.
I do not understand your reasoning.
You need advice from me? You must be kidding.
I do not joke, Doctor. Perhaps I should rephrase my statement. I require an opinion. There are many aspects of human irrationality I do not yet comprehend. obsession, for one. The persistent, single-minded fixation on one idea.
Jim and his creature?
Precisely. Have you studied the incident involving the USS Farragut?
No. With all these deaths and injuries, I've only had a chance to scan the tapes. There are eight or ten hours of record tape there.
Fortunately, I read somewhat faster. In brief, Doctor, nearly half the crew and the captain were annihilated. The captain's name was Garrovick.
The same as our Ensign.
His father. Among the survivors was a young officer on his first deep-space assignment, James T. Kirk. And there is still more. I suggest you study this.
Personal log, stardate 3620.7. Have I the right to jeopardise my crew, my ship for a feeling I can't even put into words? No man achieves Starfleet command without relying on intuition, but have I made a rational decision? Am I letting the horrors of the past distort my judgment of the present?
Mind if I come in?
Kirk to bridge. Scanning report.
Continued scanning, sir. No unusual readings.
Maintain search. Kirk out. It can't have just vanished.
Sometimes they do, if we're lucky. Monsters come in many forms. You know the greatest monster of them all, Jim? Guilt.
Get to the point.
Jim, When a young officer is exposed to unknown dangers for the first time, he's under tremendous emotional stress. Now we all know that.
Ensign Garrovick is a ship-command decision. You're straying out of your field, Doctor.
Am I? I was speaking of Lieutenant James T. Kirk of the starship Farragut. Eleven years ago, you were the young officer at the phaser station when something attacked. According to the tapes, this young Lieutenant Kirk insisted upon blaming himself.
Because I delayed in firing at it.
You had a normal emotion. You were startled. You delayed firing for a grand total of perhaps two seconds.
If I hadn't delayed, it would have been killed.
The ship's exec didn't seem to think so. His log entry was quite clear on the subject. Lieutenant Kirk is a fine young officer who performed with uncommon bravery.
Don't you understand? It killed two hundred crewmen.
Captain Garrovick was very important to you, wasn't he, Jim?
Yes. He was my commanding officer from the day I left the Academy. One of the finest men I ever knew. I could have killed that thing if I'd fired soon enough the first time.
You don't know that, Jim. You don't know that any more than you know that Garrovick could have destroyed it.
I can't help how I feel. There's an intelligence about it, Bones. A malevolence. It's evil. It must be destroyed.
To be so obsessed.
Obsessed?
That you could destroy yourself, your career, a young boy who reminds you of yourself eleven years ago.
Don't push our friendship past the point where I have to take official
I'm not, Jim. This is professional, Captain. I am preparing a medical log entry on my estimation of the physical and emotional condition of a starship captain. Which requires a witness of command grade.
Do I take it, Doctor, Commander, that both of you or either of you consider me unfit or incapacitated?
Correctly phrased, Captain. As recommended in the manual. Our reply, also as recommended, is, sir, we have noted in your recent behaviour certain items, which, on the surface, seem unusual. We respectfully ask permission to inquire further
Blast it! Forget the manual! Ask your questions.
Sir, the USS Yorktown is waiting now at the rendezvous point. It carries perishable drugs
Skip the recitation, Spock. I know the facts.
They need those vaccines on Theta Seven, Captain. Now why are we delaying here?
Because I'm convinced that this is the same creature that attacked the Farragut eleven years ago.
Creature, Captain?
My report is on the tapes. As it attacked us eleven years ago, as I lost consciousness, I could feel the intelligence of the thing. I could sense it thinking, planning.
You say you could sense its intelligence, Captain? How did it communicate with you?
You state that it happened just as you lost consciousness. A semiconscious mind is a very tricky thing. A man never knows how much is real or how much is imagination.
Whatever it is, Doctor, whatever it is, wouldn't you call it deadly?
Yes, there's no doubt about that.
And what if it is the same creature that attacked eleven years ago from a planet over a thousand light years from here?
Obviously, Captain, if it is an intelligent creature, if it is the same one, if it therefore is capable of space travel, it could pose a great threat to inhabited planets.
A lot of ifs, I agree, but in my command judgment, they out weigh other factors. Intuition, however illogical, Mister Spock, is recognized as a command prerogative.
Jim, we're not trying to gang up on you.
And you haven't, Doctor. You've expressed the proper concern, you've asked the proper questions. You've both done your duty. Now may I ask what medical log entry you intend to make?
At this point, my medical log remains open.
In that case, gentlemen
Bridge to Captain. Come in. 
Kirk here.
I have a reading on the whatever it is, Captain. Leaving the planet surface, heading into space.
All decks, Red Alert. Red alert. Prepare to leave orbit.
Captain, we can't maintain warp eight speed much longer. Pressures are approaching the critical point.
Range, Mister Chekov?
Point zero four light years ahead. Our phasers won't reach it, sir.
We are barely closing in on it, Captain. We could be pursuing it for days.
If necessary. Do what you can to increase our speed, Scott.
Aye, sir.
Extreme magnification, Mister Chekov.
Magnification twelve. There, sir. Got it.
Spock, how do you read that?
Conflicting data, Captain. It seems to be in a borderline state between matter and energy. Elements of both. It could possibly use gravitational fields for propulsion.
And you don't find that sophisticated, Mister Spock?
Extremely efficient, Captain. Whether that indicates intelligence is another matter.
Open hatch on impulse engine number two. Mister Scott was doing an AID clean-up on it.
We won't be using the impulse engines. Turn the alarm off.
Aye, sir.
Captain, we can't do it. If we keep this speed, we'll blow up any minute now.
Go to warp six.
Hi. Everyone else is at alert station, so I brought you some dinner.
I'm not hungry.
Doctor's orders.
What's happening?
Are we still chasing that thing half way across the galaxy? Yes. Has the captain lost his sense of balance? Maybe. Is the entire crew about ready to explode? Positively. You're lucky you're out of it.
What do you mean, out of it? I caused it. You know that, too, don't you? If I'd fired my phaser quickly enough on Argus Ten, this wouldn't have happened.
You know, self-pity's a terrible first course. Why don't you try the soup instead?
I told you, Christine, I'm not hungry.
Doctor McCoy thought you might say something like that. This is his officially logged prescription for you. It has one word on it. Eat. Now if you don't follow his orders, Doctor McCoy could and possibly would have you hauled down to Sickbay and fed intravenously.
What's that?
Hmm? (picks up the tape again) This?
(reading) A survey on Cygnian Respiratory Diseases? I thought you took Garrovick some food. What were you doing with this?
Applying psychology.
The creature is slowing. It's down to warp two.
Reduce speed. Approach slowly.
I don't understand. It was outrunning us.
Maybe it's decided to fight. Phasers ready?
Phasers show ready, sir.
Battle stations. All decks to battle stations. This is not a drill. All decks to battle stations.
It's coming to a full halt, sir. Magnification one.
Move in closely, Mister Chekov. Sublight one quarter speed.
Captain, request permission to return to my post.
Within phaser range, sir.
Lock all phasers on target.
Locked on target.
Fire phasers, Mister Chekov.
Phasers ineffectual, sir.
Photon torpedoes. Minimum spread pattern.
Minimum pattern ready, sir.
Fire photon torpedoes.
There. It's coming, sir.
Deflectors up.
Deflectors up, sir.
The deflectors will not stop it, Captain.
That's impossible.
I should have surmised this. For the creature to be able to use gravity as a propulsive force, it would have to have this capacity.
Five seconds to contact. All hatches and vents secure. All lights on the board show green. Sir! The number two impulse vent! we have a red light!
(over Chekov's speech) Lieutenant Uhura, all decks (rest of speech lost under Chekov's increasing volume)
Captain, something's entered through the number two impulse vent.
Negative pressure in all ship's vents. Alert all decks.
Report.
When it entered impulse engine number two's vent, it attacked two crewmen. It then got into the ventilating system, and now we have air for only two hours.
Bones?
One man has a chance for survival. The other is dead. You can add that little price tag to your monster hunt.
That's enough, Bones.
It's not enough! You didn't care as long as you could hang your trophy on the wall. Well, it's not on it, Captain, it's in it.
May I suggest that we no longer belabour the question of whether or not we should have gone after the creature. The matter has now been rendered academic. The creature is now after us.
Creature, Mister Spock?
It turned and attacked, Doctor. Its method was well-considered and intelligent.
Yes, well, it could have been many light years away from us. Instead it chose to turn and attack here. Why?
Impossible to tell, Captain, until I can make a closer survey of the creature.
Scotty, try flushing the radioactive waste into the ventilation system. See what effect that has.
Aye. (leaves)
I'm sorry, Jim. I was wrong. (leaves)
Captain, the creature's ability to throw itself out of time sync makes it possible for it to be elsewhere in the instant the phaser hits. There is therefore no basis for your self-recrimination. If you had fired on time and on target eleven years ago, it would have made no more difference than it did an hour ago. Captain Garrovick would still be dead. The fault was not yours, Jim. In fact, there was no fault.
If you want to play analyst, Spock, use someone else, not me. My concern is with the ship and the crew.
Come in.
Ensign, am I correct in my assumption that you've been disturbed by what you consider to be a failure on your part? (a nod) I would like you to consider that the hesitation for which you are blaming yourself is an hereditary trait of your species. When suddenly faced by the unknown or imminent danger, the human will experience a split second of indecision. He hesitates. Do I have your attention, Ensign?
Yes, sir.
I know you would prefer to wallow in emotion rather than
Mister Spock, it's very kind of you to come here
Kindness, Mr. Garrovick, is another human emotion, and I believe we have enough of that. I simply would like you to accept the fact that your reaction has its basis in physio. (suddenly stops and sniffs) Do you smell something?
Sir, it's coming through the vent.
Get out of here! I'll attempt to seal it off.
(into intercom) Sir, the creature's in my cabin. It's got Mister Spock.
On my way, Garrovick. Security to three four one. Medical alert. Scotty, reverse cabin pressure three four one.
Security, hold it. Tricorder.
Jim, Spock may be dying.
If we let that thing into the ship, he'll have a lot of company.
I must have jammed the vent control when I hit it.
See if the reverse pressure has pulled it back into the ventilation system.
He saved my life, Captain. I should be lying dead in there, not him.
Fortunately, neither of us is dead, Ensign. The reverse pressure worked. The vent is closed.
Don't misunderstand my next question. Mister Spock, why aren't you dead?
It's that green blood of his.
My haemoglobin is based on copper, not iron.
I'll bet he left a bad taste in the creature's mouth, too.
Colloquially expressed, but essentially correct.
Yes. The scent is different. I think I understand something now.
Do you believe you're in communication with the creature?
I don't know what it is, Mister Spock, but you remember I said the thing was alive. It may not be communication as we understand it, but I did know it was alive and intelligent, and I think I know something else now.
Engineering to Captain Kirk. Engineering to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Scott, Captain. The creature's moving back toward the number two impulse vent. The radioactive flushing may be affecting it.
Open the vent. On my way to the bridge. Kirk out. Ensign Garrovick.
Yes, sir.
You were on the bridge when we were attacked.
Yes, I'm sorry, sir. I know I was confined to quarters, but when the alert sounded
Very commendable, Ensign. What was your impression of the battle?
I don't understand, sir.
I'm asking for your military appraisal of the techniques used against the creature.
Ineffective, Captain. I realise, Captain, you did everything you could do. I know that. It's just that nothing works against a monster that can do the things that thing does.
And Ensign, what is your appraisal of your conduct on the planet?
I delayed firing.
If you hadn't delayed firing? No difference, Ensign. No weapon known would have made any difference. Then or eleven years ago. Report for duty, Ensign.
Yes, Captain. Thank you, sir.
Report, Mister Chekov.
Results positive, Captain. The creature has left the ship at high warp speed and is already nearly out of scanner range. The way that thing can move, Captain, I wouldn't believe it.
Direction, Mister Spock.
It was bearing one two seven mark nine, but I've lost it now.
(into intercom) Mister Scott, I'll need all the speed you can deliver. Keep at it until we begin to shake apart. Kirk out. I believe I know where it's going.
It has changed course before to mislead us, Captain. Logic would dictate that
No, I'm playing intuition. Mister Chekov, compute a course for Tychos star system.
Computed and on the board.
Ahead full.
Ahead full, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, contact Starfleet and the USS Yorktown.
Frequency open and clear, sir.
Inform them that we are pursuing the creature to planet four of that system. That's the location of its attack on the USS Farragut eleven years ago.
I do not understand, Captain.
In Garrovick's quarters, I said the scent of the creature was somehow different. Something in my mind said home.
And you know where home is, Captain?
Yes, I think I do. I don't know how I know, but home is where it fought a starship once before. Ito Uhura) Inform them of our tactical situation and inform them I'm committing this vessel to the destruction of the creature. We will rendezvous. Round-trip time, Mister Chekov.
One point seven days, sir.
We will rendezvous with the USS Yorktown in forty eight hours.
I assume that you now believe we should pursue the creature and destroy it.
Precisely.
You don't agree with Mister Spock?
It's the time factor that bothers me. Those drugs are perishable.
Doctor, evidence indicates the creature is here to spawn. If so, it will reproduce by fission, not just into two parts, but thousands.
Antimatter seems our only possibility.
An ounce should be sufficient. We can drain it from the ship's engines and transport it to the planet surface in a magnetic vacuum field.
Contact medical stores. I want as much haemoplasm as they can spare in the transporter room in fifteen minutes.
Yes, sir.
I presume you intend to use that haemoplasm to attract the creature?
We must get it to the antimatter. It seems attracted to red blood cells. What better bait could we have?
There is still one problem, Captain.
The blast, yes.
Exactly. A matter-antimatter blast will rip away half the planet's atmosphere. If our vessel is in orbit and encounters those shock waves
A chance we'll have to take, Mister Spock.
Also, we cannot be certain the transporter will operate under those conditions. If a man is beaming up when that hits, we may lose him.
That's exactly why I've decided to set the trap myself.
Captain, there is so little hemoglobin in my green blood, the creature could not harm me extensively. It therefore seems logical for me to be the one
Negative, Mister Spock. In case this plan fails, I'll need you aboard the ship. In that event, we'll need another plan.
It will require two men to transport the antimatter unit.
I'd like permission to go with you, sir.
I had you in mind, Mister Garrovick.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Spock here, Captain.
Proceed immediately to maximum orbit.
Acknowledged.
Just think, Captain, less than one ounce of antimatter here is more powerful than ten thousand cobalt bombs.
Let's hope it's as powerful as man will ever get. Detonator.
Aye, sir.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Spock here, Captain. Holding at thirty thousand kilometres.
Antimatter container positioned and armed. I'll call you back when it's baited. Kirk out.
Captain, look!
The haemoplasm. The bait's already taken.
We'll need something else for bait.
Sir, that thing only feeds on blood.
Garrovick, get back to the ship. Tell them to prepare to detonate.
Captain, you're not going to be the bait.
I said, get back to the ship. Ensign, I gave you an order.
Yes, sir.
Consider yourself on report. This is no time for heroics. I have no intention of sacrificing myself, at least not yet. (into communicator) Spock? Spock?
Spock here.
Scan us and lock on to us. It's going to be close. Very, very close. Stand by. Stand by, Enterprise.
I can smell it, Captain. It's sickening. Honey sweet.
Stand by, Enterprise. (The cloud reaches them) Now! Energise and detonate!
Reset. Energise.
All decks, stand by. Shock waves.
Do something.
We are, Doctor. Cross-circuiting to A.
Got them. A piece of them, anyway.
Cross-circuiting to B.
Crazy way to travel, spreading a man's molecules all over the universe.
Captain, thank heaven.
Mister Scott, there was no deity involved. It was my cross-circuiting to B that recovered them.
Well then, thank pitchforks and pointed ears. As long as it worked, Jim.
That's a fair statement, Bones. Now that the creature is dead, let's save some lives. We'll deliver your medicine. Bridge, this is Kirk.
Uhura here.
Have Mister Chekov lay in a course for a rendezvous with the Yorktown, maximum warp.
Aye, sir.
Oh, Ensign, meet me in my quarters when you've cleaned up. I'd like to talk to you about your father. Several tall stories I think you'd like to hear.
Thank you, sir. I would.
Wolf In The Fold
Captain, I think I'm going to like Argelius.
Obviously a man of good taste.
You mean to tell me all these women, that all this is
Yes, yes, yes. The Argelians think very highly of their pleasure.
That's an understatement if I ever heard one. This is a completely hedonistic society.
Do you like her, Scotty?
Aye. Why shouldn't I?
Good. I've invited her to join us at the table. I thought you might like to meet her.
Now that's what I call a real Captain. Always thinking of his men.
Scotty, Scotty. In Argelius they use the lights.
Now no one has to tell an old Aberdeen pub-crawler how to applaud, Captain.
Have one of our pillows?
'Tis a fine foggy night tonight, and I doubt if anyone's ever told you of the marvellous fogs we have in Aberdeen.
Well then, why don't I show you? There's nothing like a walk in the fog with a bonny lass.
You don't mind, do you? I might even get back to the ship on time.
We won't leave without you, Scotty. Relax and enjoy yourself. (Scott and Kara leave) My work is never done.
My work, Jim. This is prescription stuff. Don't forget, the explosion that threw Scotty against a bulkhead was caused by a woman.
Physically he's all right. Am I right in assuming that?
Oh, yes, yes. As a matter of fact, considerable psychological damage could have been caused. For example, his total resentment toward women.
He seems he's overcoming his resentment.
Of course, in my professional opinion, when he gets back to the ship, he's going to hate you for making him leave Argelius. But then he will have lost total resentment toward women.
Mission accomplished as far as Scotty is concerned. Bones, I know a little place across town where the women
Oh yes. I know the place. Let's go.
She's dead, Jim.
Stabbed, a dozen times.
(a neat man in a suit) I don't know what to say, gentlemen. Argelius is the last planet in the galaxy I'd expect a thing like this to happen.
We're just as shocked as you are, Mister Hengist.
If this was my home planet, Rigel Four, I'd have a dozen investigators working on the matter, but they don't exist here.
You're not a native of Argelius, sir?
Oh, no. Argelius hires its administrative officers from other planets. The Argelians aren't very efficient, you know. Gentle, harmless people. Mister Scott. Mister Scott? Now, are you sure you've never seen this before? (the knife)
I, I don't remember.
Really, sir. That is hardly helpful.
Scotty, you left the cafe with the girl. Do you remember that? What happened next?
We were walking in the fog. I was up ahead trying to lead the way. I heard the girl scream. I remember starting to turn. I don't remember another thing.
Scotty, you've got to remember.
Jim. (they move off a little way) If he says he can't remember, he probably doesn't. You know Scotty.
I know a murder's been committed.
You don't think by any chance that Scotty
It doesn't make any difference what I think.
But you don't just throw him to the wolves.
Bones, I have a diplomatic responsibility. This happened under Argelian jurisdiction. If they want to arrest him, try him, even convict him, I have to go along with it.
But he's suffering from a severe concussion.
We'll do what we can.
It's not promising, Captain. Mister Scott insists he remembers nothing, but my detector readings indicates that only his fingerprints are on the murder weapon.
Yes. Mister Hengist, there were other people in the cafe about the time of the murder. Several of them left just before Mister Scott and the girl did.
So I've been informed by the staff. They're being located and we will question them. But the outlook for your friend is quite grim.
What's the law in these cases?
The law of Argelius is love.
Gentlemen, our prefect, Jaris. Sir, Captain Kirk, Doctor McCoy.
And this is my wife, Sybo.
And this man is Scott, the one I sent you the message about.
He does not look like a man capable of such an act. Still, it's been so long. Gentlemen, before our great awakening two hundred years ago, we had ways of learning the truth in such matters. We shall return to them.
The Argelian empathic contact?
You know of this?
Yes, we've heard of it. I assumed it was a lost art.
My wife is a descendent of the ancient priestesses of our land. She has the ancestral gift. Gentlemen, I have come to invite you to my home.
Prefect, don't you think this should be handled in an official manner through my office?
It shall be handled in an official manner, Mister Hengist, since I am the highest official. Gentlemen, let us proceed to my home where, with the aid of my wife, we shall learn the truth. Please.
Depending on your wife's empathic abilities is all very well, Prefect, but there's only one way we can find out what it is Mister Scott cannot remember. Since you find it impossible to let us go back up to our ship, I can beam down a technician with a psycho-tricorder.
Prefect, it will give us a detailed account of everything that's happened to Mister Scott in the last twenty four hours.
Oh, I'd advise against it, Prefect. This is purely an Argelian matter.
My wife must meditate for a time before she's ready. I see no reason why we should not use that time to good advantage. Very well, Captain.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise. Spock here.
Mister Spock, beam down a technician with a psycho-tricorder, please. Use these co-ordinates.
Acknowledged. Co-ordinates received.
Kirk out.
Prefect, the psycho-tricorder will require privacy to be effective.
There is a small chamber below this room. Perhaps that will suffice. Captain, news of this frightful murder is spreading among my people. They're greatly disturbed. I have already heard talk of closing Argelius to space vehicles.
Well, that would be most unfortunate. Argelian hospitality is well-known, as well as its strategic importance as a space port.
Yes. I believe it's the only one in the quadrant. (hands out drinks) Captain.
There are other people we should question. Perhaps I should go expedite their arrival here?
Yes, please do so, Mister Hengist. Anyone with any connection with this murder should be present at the ceremony.
Lieutenant, I want a twenty four hour regressive memory check made on Mister Scott.
If you'll Just follow me, Lieutenant.
Scotty, co-operate completely with Lieutenant Tracy. Maybe we'll clear this thing up.
I certainly hope so, sir. I can't stand this not knowing. (leaves)
Captain, under normal conditions, Scotty would have never done such a thing.
But that blow on the head. It could put all his previous behaviour patterns into the junk heap.
Of course, there's another possibility.
Explain.
Hysterical amnesia. When a man feels guilty about something, something too terrible to remember, he blots it out of his conscious memory.
Are you ready, Sybo?
I am ready. May I have the knife, please?
Certainly. Among other gifts, Sybo has the ability to receive impressions from inanimate objects. Do you have it, Captain?
The knife? No.
But I put it here when we arrived. It's gone.
Scotty.
She's dead, Jim. Just like the other one.
Stabbed over and over again.
(to Scott) Drink this. An Argelian stimulant, Doctor. Quite effective and quite harmless.
Go ahead, Scotty.
Lieutenant? Captain? Where's
Lieutenant Tracy is dead, Scott. You were found alone in the room.
Dead? But I
What happened down there?
I was sitting there. She was taking her readings, and now I'm sitting here.
Is that all that happened?
I tell you, I don't remember. I must have passed out.
It could be, Jim. That head injury.
That head injury. Think, Scotty.
Captain, I've been trying. I can't even believe this is really happening.
There's no way into that place from up here. Prefect, is there another entrance to that chamber?
Yes, there's a door that leads into the garden, but it's been locked for years.
Locks can be picked, Jim.
Check it.
Prefect, both of these men were at the cafe the night of the murder.
Where've they been during the past few minutes?
Captain, if you don't mind please.
There's been another murder, Hengist. One of my crew.
The same as Kara.
Why, that's terrible. (to the man from the next table) You, my men picked you up near there. What were you doing?
Please, I know nothing about it. I didn't kill anyone.
Well, how was the girl killed?
Stabbed. And there's no sign of the weapon.
If only I had facilities.
You. You were a musician at the cafe. You played for the murdered girl.
Since she was a little girl, she danced for me. She was my daughter. Prefect, how could this thing have happened here? The man who did it must be found. He must be punished.
And you. You left the cafe before Scott and Kara.
Is this true? Who are you?
Morla of Cantaba Street, Prefect. I was there. I have nothing to hide.
Did you know Kara?
Of course he knew her. They were to be married, but he behaved disgracefully. Unheard of. He was jealous of her.
That is very disquieting.
I know it was wrong, but I just couldn't help myself. I loved her, and when she went over to the table with these men, I could not stand to watch, so I left and went home.
Jealousy has often been a motive for murder.
Yes, I know. That is why the emotion is so strongly disapproved of here.
Prefect, I didn't kill anyone. I couldn't.
We shall see, Morla.
Sorry, Jim. The lock may or may not have been picked. It would be hard to tell even with the tricorder.
Can you prove you went directly home?
Captain, may I continue with the questions please?
Well get on with it, man. Just don't stand there.
Captain, Captain. You're behaving very much like a man who is desperately trying anything to save his friend. Would you be as desperate to save Argelius as a space port for your Starfleet?
Well of course I'm trying to save my friend, if he's innocent. And he hasn't been proven guilty.
Need I remind you of the circumstances, Captain? In both cases, your friend Scott was discovered over the body and later claimed to remember nothing.
I am ready, Jaris.
Gentlemen, sit down please.
On one condition, Prefect. That the room be sealed so that no one can leave or enter while the ceremony is going on.
(he flicks a row of switches and the doorways are closed) The room is sealed.
Captain, you mean my neck is going to have to depend on some spooky mumbo jumbo?
Kirk here.
Spock here, Captain. May I have a word with you?
Yes. Excuse me, gentlemen. (moves away from the group) Yes, Mister Spock?
Concerning the situation you related to us. In my opinion, the Argelian empathic contact is an interesting phenomenon, but the technique is not sound enough to risk a man's life.
What do you suggest, Mister Spock?
Simply that we beam Mister Scott on board the Enterprise and employ our computers to learn the truth.
These are a proud people. They have their own customs, their own laws, and while we're here we're subject to them. It is absolutely imperative that this matter be resolved according to Argelian law. Is that clear?
Quite clear, Captain.
I don't like it any more than you do, Spock, but there's nothing we can do about it. Kirk out,
Let us begin. Let the circle not be broken. Concentrate upon the flame which burns upon the altar of truth.
Three murders, and Scotty the only possible answer each time.
I don't care what the circumstances indicate, Jim. Scotty simply could not have done it.
Normally, no, but that blow on his head could
No, Captain.
I agree with you, Captain. I'm perfectly satisfied Mister Scott is guilty.
But not responsible.
That is unproven, sir.
We can prove it, if he's insane.
Gentlemen, please. How could any man do such monstrous things?
That's what we hope to find out, sir.
Mister Scott?
Sir, I swear to you I did not kill your wife or the other ladies.
By your own admission, you don't know whether you did or didn't. Your so-called failing memory
Mister Hengist. On the Enterprise, we can make a recording of the registrations of Mister Scott's conscious and subconscious mind. They will tell us what happened to him in the recent past.
There would be no room for doubt. We would know. And after all, that's what we're after, isn't it, Prefect? To know?
You, sir, claim to remember nothing about the murders.
Aye.
If this is so, you may have killed without knowing it. Will your machines tell us this?
No doubt will remain.
Very well. We will go to your ship, and he who is guilty will face the ancient penalties, barbaric and horrible though they may be. The ancient penalty for murder was death by slow torture. That law has never been changed. Do you understand that, Mister Scott?
Aye. I understand.
Each testifier will sit here, place his hand on this plate. Any deviation from factual truth will be immediately detected and relayed to this computer which will in turn notify us. Doctor McCoy has already fed the computer his medical reports. Our laboratory experts are examining the murder weapon and will give their data to the computers for analysis. Shall we begin?
Mister Scott, will you take the stand?
Computer, identify verification.
Working. Lieutenant Commander Montgomery Scott. Serial number SE-19754-T. Verified.
Subject's present physical condition.
Working. Subject recently received severe blow on skull. Damage healing. Some peripheral abnormalities.
Sufficient abnormalities to account for periods of functional amnesia?
Working. Negative.
Captain, I don't see how that can be.
Unless Scotty's lying about his loss of memory.
I'm not lying, Captain. I don't remember a thing about the first two murders.
Computer, accuracy scan.
Subject relaying accurate account. No physiological changes.
Captain? I didn't black out when Mister Jaris' wife was killed.
All right, Scotty, let's have it.
We were holding hands. When the lights went out, the circle was broken. I heard the poor lady scream, and as I was near the head of the table anyway I went toward her. But there was something in my way.
Something? You mean someone.
No, Captain, some thing. Cold, it was, like a stinking draught out of a slaughterhouse, but it wasn't really there. Like it. (lost for words) If you know what I mean.
Computer.
Subject relaying accurate account. No physiological changes.
All right. Let's hit it on the head. Scotty, did you kill Sybo?
No, Captain. That I'm sure of.
He's been saying that right along. It means no more now than it did before.
Scotty, lie to me. How old are you?
Twenty two sir.
Inaccurate. Inaccurate. Data in error.
After the lights went out, Mister Scott, who was holding your hand?
Morla on the one side and you on the other, sir.
But that doesn't mean anything, Captain, with a room that small. The lights were out. Anyone would've had time to kill the lady.
But I remind you we found Mister Scott holding her in his arms, the knife still (to Jaris) I'm sorry, sir, but I must. The knife still in her back and blood on his hands.
The verifier showed that he was telling the truth when he said he didn't kill her.
There were two other women murdered.
Mister Scott. Did you kill Kara?
I don't remember.
Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy?
I don't remember.
Computer, accuracy scan.
Subject relaying accurate account. No physiological changes.
All that proves is that he's telling the truth when he says he doesn't remember.
This is a waste of time.
After we take the testimony here, we'll run a psycho-tricorder analysis of Mister Scott's memory, which is what we wanted to do on the surface. That will give us a complete record. Will that satisfy you, Mister Hengist?
Well, if you can convince me that the machine is incapable of error, and if it shows he did not kill the women.
There will be no error. As for the rest of it, the readings will show. You can step down, Mister Scott, if there are no objections.
I object to the entire procedure.
Mister Hengist, we are here on my authority. We will co-operate.
Prefect, I know you mean well, but I've had experience
For the time being, we will accept Captain Kirk's explanation of the machine's accuracy as factual. I do, however, reserve to myself the right to make the final determination.
We can ask no more. Mister Morla, will you take the stand?
Where were you at the time that Kara was murdered?
I'm not sure. Walking home, I assume. I was angry.
Anger is a relative state, sir. Were you angry enough to do violence?
I've never done violence in my life. I don't think I could. You've got to believe me. I wouldn't kill her. I couldn't. I loved her, and she loved me.
That's not true! He might think she loved him, but she didn't. She told me. He was jealous. All the time. They fought constantly.
Did you kill Lieutenant Tracy?
No.
Did you kill Sybo?
No.
Computer, verification scan.
Subject relaying accurate account, though some statements subjective. No physiological changes.
All right, Mister Morla, I think you can step down now. Sybo spoke of a hunger that never dies. Something that thrives on fear, terror, death. Mister Spock, maybe we're going about it in the wrong way. Let's assume that Sybo was a sensitive. That she did sense something, something evil.
Sensitivity of certain Argelian women is a documented fact, Captain.
My poor Sybo's talent was genuine, gentlemen. What she told you was true.
All right, then, what was it she said, exactly? A monstrous evil, ancient terror.
That devours all life and light.
She said something else, words that didn't make sense.
Yes. Redjac, Beratis and, er, Kesla.
Obscure, meaningless words.
To us, perhaps, but to the computer?
Ah. Mister Spock, check them out.
Computer, linguistic bank. Definition of following word. Redjac.
Working. Negative finding.
There is no such word in the linguistics bank?
Affirmative.
Scan all other banks.
Working. Affirmative. A proper name.
Define.
Redjac. Source Earth, nineteenth century. Language, English. Nickname for mass murderer of women. Other Earth synonym, Jack the Ripper.
Jack the Ripper?
That's ridiculous. He lived hundreds of years ago.
A man couldn't survive all these centuries.
Just before she died, my wife said, it is a hunger that never dies.
But all men die.
Yes, all men die. And Jack the Ripper couldn't be alive if he were a man. But everything we've uncovered points to Jack the Ripper, which is an impossibility, isn't it? Or is it?
Humans and humanoids make up only a small percentage of the life forms we know of. There are entities possessed of extremely long life spans, virtually immortal.
We know that someone or something killed three women. If it's impossible for it to be human, it has to be something else. Something driven to kill.
Sybo said it feeds on death.
In the strict scientific sense, Doctor, we all feed on death. Even vegetarians.
Yes, but she said more than that. Not just death, but fear. She said it also feeds on fear.
Which would tend to support the proposition that the murderer was not human. Deriving sustenance from emotion is not unknown in the galaxy, and fear is among the strongest and most violent of the emotions.
Surely, Prefect, this has gone far enough. Someone, some man has killed three women. We have the prime suspect in our hands. Are we going to let him go and start chasing ghosts?
No, Mister Hengist, not ghosts. Possibly not human, but not ghosts. Mister Spock, check out the possibilities.
Computer, digest log recordings for past five solar minutes. Correlate hypotheses. Compare with life forms register. Question. Could such an entity within discussed limits exist in this galaxy?
The Drella of Alpha Carinae Five derives nourishment from the emotion of love. There is sufficient precedent for existence of creature, nature unknown, which could exist on emotion of fear.
Computer, extrapolate most likely composition of such entity.
Working. To meet with specified requirements, entity would exist without form in conventional sense. Most probable mass of energy of highly cohesive electromagnetic field.
Computer, could the described entity assume physical form?
Affirmative. Precedent, mellitus, cloud creature of Alpha Majoris One.
Fairy tales. Ghosts and goblins.
No, I've seen the mellitus myself. In its natural state, it's gaseous. When it's at rest, it's solid. Mister Spock, let's assume the existence of this creature.
I point out that Jack the Ripper slew at will in the heart of the most populous city of old Earth and was never identified.
Doesn't seem likely, does it?
I suggest the possibility of a hypnotic screen, which blinds all but the victim to the presence of the killer.
Is that possible?
Extremely possible There are many such examples that exist in nature.
This is fantasy! We all know the murderer is sitting right here. You're trying to cloud the issue. I've got a mind to
I am satisfied the course of this investigation is valid enough. Please be seated, Mister Hengist.
All right, Mister Spock, what do we have? A creature without form, that feeds on horror and fear, that must assume a physical shape to kill.
And I suspect preys on women because women are more easily and more deeply terrified, generating more sheer horror than the male of the species.
Computer. Criminological files. Cases of unsolved mass murders of women since Jack the Ripper.
Working. 1932. Shanghai, China, Earth. Seven women knifed to death. 1974, Kiev, USSR, Earth. Five women knifed to death. 2105. Martian colonies. Eight women knifed to death. 2156. Heliopolis, Alpha Eridani Two. Ten women knifed to death. There are additional examples.
Captain, those places are aligned directly between Argelius and Earth.
Yes. When man moved out into the galaxy, that thing must've moved with him. Computer, identify the proper names Kesla and Beratis.
Working. Kesla. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Deneb Two. Beratis. Name given to unidentified mass murderer of women on planet Rigel Four. Additional data. Murders on Rigel Four occurred one solar year ago.
You come from Rigel Four.
Well, many people do. It's not a crime.
No, but what we're investigating is. Would you mind taking the stand, Mister Hengist?
I will not.
Mister Hengist.
Prefect, this has gone far enough. I will not take the stand.
I can appreciate your position, sir. You are in charge of civil disturbances locally. If you are the entity for which we search, what better position from which to kill with impunity?
Just after you left Jaris' house, we discovered the murder knife was missing.
And you were unaccounted for when Lieutenant Tracy was murdered.
An entity which feeds on fear and terror would find a perfect hunting ground on Argelius, a planet without violence, where the inhabitants are as peaceful as sheep. The entity would be as a hungry wolf in that fold.
Gentlemen, I know something of the law. You're engaging in sheer speculation.
Perhaps. Mister Spock. The murder weapon.
Computer. Report on analysis of Exhibit A.
Working. Exhibit A on visual. Composition of blade, boridium. Composition of handle, murinite. Details of carving on handle conform to folk art forms, indicating place of origin.
Specify. Point of origin.
Artefact produced by hill people of Argus River region, planet Rigel Four.
Now then, Mister Hengist
He's dead, Jim.
But that's impossible.
Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! (maniacal laughter)
The computer will not respond to these controls. The entity is unquestionably controlling it.
And the computer controls the ship.
Redjac! Redjac! Redjac! Redjac!
Scotty, give me a hand. (They prop Hengist up on a chair, leaning against the table.)
It's no use, Captain. The bypass circuits are blocked.
Audio cut off, Spock.
Captain!
What does it mean?
It means that thing can control the entire operation of the ship, including the life support systems.
You mean it could kill us all?
Indeed, it will try, but not immediately. We know it feeds on fear and terror. There are nearly four hundred and forty humans aboard this ship. Surely it will try to breed fear and terror before it kills.
All hands, this is the captain. Stay at your posts. Remain calm. Captain out. Bones. What's the sedative situation?
I've got some stuff that would tranquillise an active volcano.
Good. Start distribution immediately. The longer we can hold back that fear, the more time we'll have to get that thing out of the computer. Prefect, you'll all be safer here. Spock, come with me.
Spock, don't you have a compulsory scan unit built into the computer banks?
Yes we do, Captain, but with the entity in control
Aren't there certain mathematical problems which simply cannot be solved?
Indeed. If we could focus the attention of the computer on one of them.
That ought to do it.
Spock!
Apparently our friends learned very quickly.
Too quickly. Bridge.
Freefall!
Out of control. Put it on manual. Bridge.
That was due to be next. Life-support malfunction.
We don't have much time, Captain.
You said it yourself, Spock. It wants terror, not just death.
Captain, the life-support system override jammed.
All right. Man your station, Mister Sulu.
Aye, sir.
Captain, you're wasting your time.
Cut that thing off.
You and all aboard your ship are about to die!
Try and cut that thing off.
This is the first time I heard a malfunction threaten us.
Man your post, Mister Sulu. (to all the crew) Prepare your manual overrides. You may need them.
Aye, sir.
Spock.
Normal environmental levels have been restored, Captain, but it will not last long. A few hours at best.
That should be enough time. Let's get at it.
What's going on, Captain?
Never mind, Mister Sulu.
Tranquilliser?
Yes, sir.
Everyone, including yourself.
Yes, sir.
You cannot stop me now, Captain. It will do you no good. I control all circuits. You cannot silence me. You cannot reach me. Your manual overrides are extremely limited in life.
Spock?
Proceeding, Captain, but I will need some time.
Yes, I know.
Soon all control will be restored to me! There is nothing you can do to prevent it!
If you destroy this ship, you destroy yourself.
I am without ending. I have existed from the dawn of time, and I shall I live beyond its end! In the meantime, I shall feed, and this time I do not need a knife. You will all die horribly in searing pain!
It is attempting to generate terror, Captain.
I can cut off your oxygen and suffocate you!
Captain? (gets his injection, and grins) Who ever he is, he sure talks gloomy.
Man your post, Mister. If any of the other systems go out, switch to manual override, and above all, don't be afraid.
With an armful of this stuff, I wouldn't be afraid of a supernova.
Ready.
Implement.
Computer, this is a Class A compulsory directive. Compute to the last digit the value of pi.
No, no, no, no! No, no!
As we know, the value of pi is a transcendental figure without resolution. The computer banks will work on this problem to the exclusion of all else until we order it to stop.
Yes, that should keep that thing busy for a while. The Argelians will be the first to panic. Let's get back to the briefing room.
I wonder who it is we're not supposed to be afraid of.
Well, sir?
I doubt very much whether the computers will be inhabited by more than a group of figures for a while.
There is resistance, Captain, but the directive is succeeding. Bank after bank is turning to the problem.
If you drive it out of the computers, it'll have to go somewhere else.
How are you doing?
I'm almost finished. Just Jaris and me.
Complete computer control, Captain. The entity has fled.
Yes, but where to? Bones, what would happen if that thing entered a tranquillised body?
Well, it might take up knitting, but nothing more violent than that.
You say everyone's had a shot but you and Jaris?
And you and Mister Spock, Captain.
Well, I'm willing to take a chance on Mister Spock. Better give yourself a shot, Doc.
No, I don't think so. I think I ought to stay clear.
Do as I say.
Extend your arm, Mister Jaris.
(grabs Kirk's throat) No, no, kill you all! Die! Make you suffer!
Everybody keep back or I'll kill her! I'll kill her! Keep back!
You'd better be careful. You're going to hurt somebody with that thing.
You'll suffer! You'll suffer. (Spock injects him) I'll kill all of you.
Let's get him to the Transporter Room, quick!
You'll die, die, die. Everybody will die.
Kill, kill, kill you all.
Deep space. Full power. Widest angle of dispersion. Maintain.
No need to get excited, Captain. I'll do it.
You do it, Spock.
Everybody die. You'll all suffer.
You didn't have to shove me, Mister Spock. I'd have gotten round to it.
Well, Jaris is all right.
What did you do with that thing, Captain? Did you send it back to the planet?
No. We beamed it out into open space, Scotty. Widest possible dispersion.
That thing can't die.
Possibly, Doctor. Its consciousness may continue for some time, consisting of billions of separate bits of energy, floating forever in space, powerless.
But it will die finally. You seem very happy about the whole thing.
Why not? For a while there I didn't know whether I was innocent or guilty.
Bones, how long will it take for this tranquilliser to wear off?
I don't know. Five or six hours. I gave them a pretty big shot, Jim.
Yes, I can see that. Well Mister Spock, for the next five or six hours, we're going to have the happiest crew in space. Of course, we won't get much work done.
Captain, since you came to Argelius to rest, I suggest you take advantage of the opportunity.
That's a splendid idea, Mister Spock. I know a cafe where the women are so
I know the place, Jim.
Let's go see!
You, gentlemen? In your condition? Don't be ridiculous. Mister Spock, this cafe has women that are so. (met with a Look) No, I guess not. Alone?
Gentlemen.
The Trouble With Tribbles
Deep Space Station K7 now within sensor range, Captain.
Good. Mister Chekov, this flight is supposed to provide both experience and knowledge. How close will we come to the Klingon outpost if we continue on our present course?
One parsec, sir. Close enough to smell them.
That is illogical, Ensign. Odours cannot travel through the vacuum of space.
I was making a little joke, sir.
Extremely little, Ensign.
Mister Spock, immediate past history of the quadrant?
Under dispute between the two parties since initial contact. The battle of Donatu Five was fought near here twenty three solar years ago. Inconclusive.
Analysis of disputed area?
Undeveloped. Sherman's Planet is claimed by both sides, our Federation and the Klingon Empire. We do have the better claim.
The area was first mapped by the famous Russian astronomer Ivan Borkoff almost two hundred
John Burke.
Burke, sir? I don't think so. I'm sure it was
John Burke was the Chief Astronomer at the Royal Academy in old Britain at the time.
Oh, Royal Academy. Well
is the rest of your history that faulty, Ensign? Key points of dispute?
Under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, one side or the other must prove it can develop the planet most efficiently.
And unfortunately, though the Klingons are brutal and aggressive, they are most efficient.
I remember once Peter the Great had that problem like that. The
Captain?
Kirk here.
I'm picking up a subspace distress call. Priority channel. It's from Space Station K7.
Go to warp factor six.
Code One emergency. That's a disaster call.
This is a Red Alert. Man your battle stations. All hands.
Main phasers armed and ready, sir.
But there's nothing there. Just the station.
Priority One distress call, and it's just absolutely peaceful. Lieutenant Uhura, break subspace silence.
Aye, sir. The channel's open, sir.
Space Station K7, this is Captain Kirk of the Enterprise. What is your emergency?
This is Mister Lurry, manager of K7. I must apologise for the distress call.
Mister Lurry, you issued a Priority One distress call. State the nature of your emergency.
Well, perhaps you better beam over. I'll try to explain.
You'll try to explain. You'd better be prepared to do more than that. Kirk out. Mister Spock, I'll need your help. Mister Chekov, maintain battle readiness. Lieutenant Uhura, see that the transporter room is standing by.
Aye, sir. Transporter room, stand by.
Mister Lurry, if there's no emergency, why did you issue a priority one distress call?
That was my order, Captain.
Captain Kirk, this is Nilz Baris. He's out from Earth to take charge of the development project on Sherman's Planet.
And that gives you the authority to put an entire quadrant on defence alert?
Mister Baris is the Federation Undersecretary in Charge of Agricultural Affairs in this quadrant.
Oh.
This is my assistant Arne Darvin.
And this is my first officer Mister Spock.
Mister Spock.
And now Captain, I want all available security guards. I want them posted around the storage compartments.
Storage compartments? Storage compartments?
The storage compartments containing the quadrotriticale.
What? What? What's quadrotriticale? (Lurry hands him a small packet) Wheat. So what?
Quadrotriticale is not wheat, Captain. Of course, I wouldn't expect you or Mister Spock to know about such things, but quadrotriticale is a rather
Quadrotriticale is a high-yield grain, a four-lobed hybrid of wheat and rye. A perennial, also, I believe. Its root grain, triticale, can trace its ancestry all the way back to twentieth century Canada
Mister Spock, you've made your point.
Quadrotriticale is the only earth grain that grows on Sherman's Planet. We have several tons of it here on the station. It's very important that grain gets to Sherman's Planet safely. Mister Baris thinks that Klingon agents may try to sabotage it.
You issued a priority one distress call for a couple of tons of wheat?
Quadrotriticale!
Of course, Captain, I realise that
Mister Baris, you summoned the Enterprise without an emergency. You'll take full responsibility for it.
What do you mean?
Misuse of the Priority One channels is a Federation offence.
I did not misuse the Priority One channel. I want that grain protected.
Captain, couldn't you at least post a couple of guards? We do have a large number of ships passing through.
It would seem a logical precaution, Captain. The Sherman's Planet affair is of extreme importance to the Federation.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise here.
Secure from general quarters. And beam down two, and only two, security guards. Have them report to Mister Lurry. Authorise shore leave for all off-duty personnel.
Yes, Captain.
Kirk out.
Captain Kirk, how dare you authorise a mere two men for a project of this importance? Starfleet Command
I have never questioned the orders or the intelligence of any representative of the Federation. Until now.
Summoning a starship on a priority A-1 channel to guard some storage compartments. Storage compartments of wheat.
Nevertheless Captain, the Klingons would not enjoy seeing us successfully develop Sherman's Planet.
I guess not.
I see you didn't waste time taking your shore leave.
(coldly) How often do I get shore leave?
She wants to shop, and I thought I would help her.
(entering) Oh, excuse me. Excuse me.
(shows Chekov the packet of wheat) Mister Chekov, what do you make of this?
Oh, quadrotriticale. I've read about this, but I've never seen any before.
Does everybody know about this wheat but me?
Not everyone, Captain. It's a Russian invention.
Ah.
I don't want any. I told you before, and I'm telling you again I don't want any more Spican flame gems. Thanks to you, I have enough Spican flame gems to last me a lifetime.
How sad for you, my friend. You won't find a finer stone anywhere. But I have something better. Surely you want some Antarian glow water.
I use that to polish the flame gems.
You're a difficult man to reach, but I have something from the far reaches of the galaxy. Surely you want
Not at your price.
What is it? Is it alive? May I hold it?
Oh, it's adorable. What is it?
What is it? Why, lovely lady, it's a tribble.
A tribble?
Only the sweetest creature known to man, excepting, of course, your lovely self.
Oh, it's purring. Listen, it's purring.
It's only saying that it likes you.
Are you selling them?
That's what we're trying to decide right now.
My friend, 10 credits apiece is a very reasonable price. Now you can see for yourself how much the lovely little lady appreciates the finer things.
One credit apiece.
He won't bite, will he?
Sir, transporting harmful animals from one planet to another is against regulations, or weren't you aware of that? Besides, tribbles have no teeth.
All right. I'll double my offer 2 credits.
Twice nothing is still nothing.
If you're not going to take him, I'm going to take him. I think he's cute.
Four credits.
Is that an offer or a joke?
That's my offer.
That's a joke.
Five?
You're an honest man. I'll tell you what I'm going to do I'm going to lessen my price to eight and a half credits.
You're talking yourself out of a deal, friend. Six credits. Not a credit more.
Seven and a half. Seven? All right, you robber, six credits.
Done. When can I have them?
Right away.
All right, what are you selling them for?
Well, let me see, little lady. Six credits. Figure a reasonable mark-up for a reasonable profit, say ten percent mark-up. Ten credits.
Thief.
In fact, I'll sell you this one.
Hey! He's eating my grain.
That'll be ten credits.
That happens to be my sample, and I'll do with it as I please. And I please to give it to the lovely lady.
Oh, I couldn't. Could I?
I insist.
What are you trying to do, ruin the market?
Once this lovely little lady starts to show this precious little darling around, you won't be able to keep up with them.
Yes, what is it?
Message from Starfleet, Captain. Priority channel. Admiral Fitzpatrick speaking.
Put it on visual, Lieutenant.
Kirk here.
Now, that's just lovely.
But not totally unexpected.
Captain Kirk! Captain Kirk!
Yes, Lieutenant, what is it?
Sensors are picking up a Klingon battle cruiser rapidly closing on the station.
Go to Red Alert. Notify Mister Lurry. We'll be right up.
What is the position of the Klingon ship?
A hundred kilometres off K7. It's just sitting there.
Captain, I have Mister Lurry.
Put him on visual.
Aye, sir.
Mister Lurry, there's a Klingon warship hanging one hundred kilometres off your station.
I don't think the Klingons are planning to attack us.
Why not?
Because at this moment the captain of the Klingon ship is sitting right here in my office.
Cancel Red Alert. We'll beam right down.
Security, cancel Red Alert.
Ah, my dear Captain Kirk.
My dear Captain Koloth.
Let me assure you that my intentions are peaceful. As I've already told Mister Lurry, the purpose of my presence is to invoke shore leave rights.
Shore leave?
Captain, we Klingons are not as luxury-minded as you Earthers. We do not equip our ships with, how shall I say it, non-essentials. (makes an hour-glass gesture with his hands)
We have been in space for five months. What we choose as recreation is our own business.
I might also add that under terms of the Organian Peace Treaty, you cannot refuse us.
Yes, well, I don't make those decisions. Mister Lurry is in charge of those matters.
Captain, may I speak to you a minute? (takes him aside) Look, I don't want them here, but I don't have the authority to refuse.
Well, I have the authority to act, and I'm going to use it. My dear Captain Koloth, you may indeed bring your men down on shore leave, but only twelve at a time. And I assure you, for every man you bring down here, I shall have one security guard. There will be no trouble.
Captain Kirk, there's been no formal declaration of hostilities between our two respective governments. So, naturally, our relationship will be a peaceful one.
Let us both take steps to keep it that way.
Of course.
Another technical journal, Scotty?
Aye.
Don't you ever relax?
I am relaxing.
How long have you had that thing, Lieutenant?
Since yesterday, Doctor. This morning, I found out that he, I mean she, had had babies.
Well, in that case, you got a bargain.
You running a nursery, Lieutenant?
Oh, Captain. Well, I hadn't intended to, sir, but the tribble had other plans.
Did you get this at the space station?
Yes, sir.
(stroking a tribble) A most curious creature, Captain. Its trilling seems to have a tranquillising effect on the human nervous system. Fortunately, of course, I am immune to its effect.
Lieutenant, do you mind if I take one of these down to the lab to see what makes it tick?
Well, all right, Doctor, but if you're going to dissect it, I don't want to know about it.
I won't harm a hair on its head, wherever that is.
Sure, why not? I think they're old enough. (to all) Go ahead.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Mister Baris waiting is on channel E to speak to you, sir.
Pipe it down here will you, Mister Chekov.
Aye, sir. Mister Baris is coming on.
Yes, Mister Baris. What can I do for you?
Kirk, this station is swarming with Klingons.
I was not aware, Mister Baris, that twelve Klingons constitutes a swarm.
Captain Kirk, there are Klingon soldiers on this station. Now, I want you to keep that grain safe.
Mister Baris, I have guards around the grain. I have guards around the Klingons. The only reason those guards are there is because Starfleet wants them there. As for what you want (pauses at a look from Spock) It has been noted and logged. Kirk out.
Captain, may I ask where you'll be?
Sickbay with a headache.
Hi, Jim.
Bones, what have you got for a headache?
Let me guess. Klingons? Baris?
Both. How many of these did Uhura give you?
Just one.
But you've got, er, eleven.
You noticed that, huh? Here. This ought to take care of it.
How do they? How do they?
I haven't figured that out yet, but I can tell you this much. Almost fifty percent of the creature's metabolism is geared for reproduction. Do you know what you get if you feed a tribble too much?
A fat tribble.
No. You get a bunch of hungry little tribbles.
Well, Bones, all I can suggest is you open up a maternity ward.
All you men going on shore leave to stay in groups. Avoid trouble with the Klingons.
I'll tell them before they go, sir.
Aren't you going on shore leave, Scotty?
Why, no, sir.
I want you to go on shore leave. Make sure that everybody stays out of trouble.
But, Captain. Aye, sir.
Scotty, enjoy yourself.
Ah, friend. Can I offer you a charming little tribble?
Uh, no, thanks.
Oh. Perhaps one of you other gents?
Ah, friend Klingon. Can I interest you in a harmless tribble?
Get it away from me.
I'm sorry. I can't understand it. I've never seen them act this way before.
Get out of here with that parasite.
He's only a harmless little
Take it away!
Yes. Ah, my good friend. How would you like to enter another little transaction? This time, a tribble for a spot
A tribble.
Indeed.
(starts producing tribbles from all over the place and putting them on the bar) A tribble?
When are you going to get off that milk diet, lad?
This is vodka.
Where I come from, that's soda pop. This is a drink for a man.
Scotch?
Aye.
It was invented by a little old lady from Leningrad.
The Earthers like those fuzzy things, don't they?
Oh, yes.
That Cossack.
Easy, lad. You ought to be more forgiving.
No. I just remembered. There is one Earthman who doesn't remind me of a Regulan blood worm. That's Kirk. A Regulan blood worm is soft and shapeless, but Kirk isn't soft. Kirk may be a swaggering, overbearing, tin-plated dictator with delusions of godhood, but he's not soft.
Take it easy, lad. Everybody's entitled to an opinion.
That's right, and if I think that Kirk is a Denebian slime devil, well that's my opinion too.
Don't do it, mister, and that's an order.
You heard what he called the captain.
Forget it. It's not worth fighting for. We're big enough to take a few insults. Now, drink your drink.
Of course, I'd say that Captain Kirk deserves his ship. We like the Enterprise. We, we really do. That sagging old rust bucket is designed like a garbage scow. Half the quadrant knows it. That's why they're learning to speak Klingonese.
Mister Scott!
Laddie, don't you think you should rephrase that?
You're right, I should. I didn't mean to say that the Enterprise should be hauling garbage. I meant to say that it should be hauled away as garbage.
I want to know who started it. I'm waiting. Freeman, who started the fight?
All right. Chekov. I know you. You started it, didn't you?
No, sir, I didn't.
Who did?
I don't know, sir.
I don't know, sir. I want to know who threw the first punch. All right. You're all confined to quarters until I find out who started it. Dismissed. (the men file out) Scotty, not you. You were supposed to prevent trouble, Mister Scott.
Aye, Captain.
Who threw the first punch, Scotty?
Um.
Mister Scott?
I did, Captain.
You did, Mister Scott? What caused it, Scotty?
They insulted us, sir.
Must have been some insult.
Aye, it was.
You threw the first punch.
Aye. Chekov wanted to, but I held him back.
You held? Why did Chekov want to start a fight?
Well, the Klingon, sir. Is this off the record?
No, this is not off the record.
Well, Captain, the Klingons called you, uh a tin-plated, overbearing, swaggering dictator with delusions of godhood.
Is that all?
No, sir. They also compared you with a Denebian slime devil.
I see.
And then they said you
I get the picture, Scotty.
Yes, sir.
After they said all this, that's when you hit the Klingons?
No, sir.
No?
No, I didn't. You told us to avoid trouble.
Oh, yes.
And I didn't see that it was worth fighting about. After all, we're big enough to take a few insults. Aren't we?
What was it they said that started the fight?
They called the Enterprise a garbage scow, sir.
I see. And that's when you hit the Klingons?
Yes, sir.
You hit the Klingons because they insulted the Enterprise, not because they
Well, sir, this was a matter of pride.
All right, Scotty. Dismissed. Scotty, you're restricted to quarters until further notice.
(big grin) Yes, sir. Thank you, sir. That'll give me a chance to catch up on my technical journals.
What's the matter, Spock?
There's something disquieting about these creatures.
Don't tell me you've got a feeling.
Don't be insulting, Doctor. They remind me of the lilies of the field. They toil not, neither do they spin. But they seem to eat a great deal. I see no practical use for them.
Does everything have to have a practical use for you? They're nice, soft, and furry, and they make a pleasant sound.
So would an ermine violin, but I see no advantage in having one.
It's a human characteristic to love little animals, especially if they're attractive in some way.
Doctor, I am well aware of human characteristics. I am frequently inundated by them, but I've trained myself to put up with practically anything.
Spock, I don't know too much about these little tribbles yet, but there's one thing that I have discovered.
What is that, Doctor?
I like them better than I like you.
Doctor?
Yes?
They do have one redeeming characteristic.
What's that?
They do not talk too much. If you'll excuse me, sir.
Doctor McCoy, would you mind coming up to the bridge? (he takes a walk around then) Lieutenant Uhura, how did all these tribbles get on the bridge?
I don't know, sir. They do seem to be all over the ship.
Doctor McCoy.
Yes? Did you want to see me, Jim? Don't look at me. It's the tribbles who are breeding. If we don't get them off this ship, we're going to be hip deep in them.
Explain that.
The nearest thing I can figure out is they're born pregnant, which seems to be quite a time saver.
I know, but really
And from my observations, it seems they're bisexual, reproducing at will. And, brother, have they got a lot of will.
Captain, I am forced to agree with the doctor. I've been running computations on their rate of reproduction. The figures are taking an alarming direction. They're consuming our supplies and returning nothing.
But they do give us something, Mister Spock. They give us love. Well, Cyrano Jones says a tribble is the only love that money can buy.
Too much of anything, Lieutenant, even love, isn't necessarily a good thing.
Yes, Captain.
Get the maintenance crew to clean up the entire ship, and then contact Mister Lurry and tell him I'm beaming down.
Aye, aye.
Have him find Cyrano Jones and hold him.
Aye.
And get these tribbles off the bridge.
Aye, aye, Captain.
Captain Kirk, I'm mystified at your tone of voice. I've done nothing to warrant such severe treatment.
Oh, really?
Surely you must have realised what would happen if you removed the tribbles from their predator-filled environment into an environment where their natural multiplicative proclivities would have no restraining factors.
Of course. What did you say?
By removing the tribbles from their natural habitat, you have, so to speak, removed the cork from the bottle and allowed the genie to escape.
If by that, you mean do they breed quickly? Of course, that's how I maintain my stock. Breeding animals is not against regulations, only breeding dangerous ones. And tribbles are not dangerous.
Just incredibly prolific.
Precisely, and at six credits a head, well, that is, a body, it mounts up. Now if you'll excuse me.
You should sell an instruction and maintenance manual for this thing.
If I did, what would happen to man's search for knowledge? Well, I must be tending my ship. Au revoir.
Go ahead, sir. Tell him.
Captain Kirk, I consider your security measures a disgrace. In my opinion, you have taken this important project far too lightly.
On the contrary, sir. I think of this project as very important. It is you I take lightly.
I am going to report fully to the proper authorities that you have given free and complete access to this station to a man who is quite probably a Klingon agent.
That's a serious charge. To whom are you referring?
To that man who just walked out of here.
Cyrano Jones, a Klingon agent?
You heard me.
I heard you.
He simply could not believe his ears.
What evidence do you have against Mister Jones?
My assistant here has kept Mister Jones under close surveillance for quite some time, and his actions have been most suspicious. I believe he was involved in that little altercation between your men and the men from
Yes, yes. Go on. What else do you have?
Well Captain, I've checked his ship's log, and it seems that he was within the Klingon's sphere of influence less than four months ago.
The man is an independent scout, Captain. It is quite possible he is also a Klingon spy.
We have already checked on the background of Mister Cyrano Jones. He is a licensed asteroid locator and prospector. He's never broken the law, at least not severely. For the past seven years, with his one-man spaceship, he's obtained a marginal living by engaging in the buying and selling of rare merchandise, including, unfortunately, tribbles.
But he is after my grain!
Do you have any proof of that?
You can't deny he's disrupted this station.
People have disrupted stations before without being Klingon agents. Sometimes, all they need is a title, Mister Baris. Unfortunately, disrupting a space station is not an offence. Now, if you'll excuse me, I have a ship to tend to. Au revoir.
My chicken sandwich and coffee. This is my chicken sandwich and coffee.
Fascinating.
I want these off the ship. I don't care if it takes every man we've got, I want them off the ship.
They're into the machinery, all right, and they're probably in all the other food processors too.
How?
Probably through one of the air vents.
Captain, there are vents of that type on the space station.
And in the storage compartments. (goes to a table monitor) This is Kirk. Contact Manager Lurry and Nilz Baris. Have them meet us near the storage compartments. We're beaming down. Come on, Spock.
Energise.
What's wrong?
Plenty, if what I think's happened has happened.
Is that door secure?
Yes, sir. Nothing could get in.
Good. Open it.
It's not working, sir. It seems to be stuck.
Here. Let me try it.
They seem to be gorged.
Gorged? On my grain? Kirk, I am going to hold you responsible. There must be thousands of them.
Hundreds of thousands.
One million seven hundred seventy one thousand five hundred sixty one. That's assuming one tribble, multiplying with an average litter of ten, producing a new generation every twelve hours over a period of three days.
That's assuming they got here three days ago.
And allowing for the amount of grain consumed and the volume of the storage compartment.
Kirk, you should have known. You are responsible for turning the development project into a total disaster.
Mister Baris
And I'm through being intimidated, Kirk. You have insulted me, you have ignored me, you've walked all over me. You have abused your authority, and you've rejected my requests. And this, this is the result. I'm going to hold you responsible.
Mister Baris, I'll hold you in irons if you don't shut up.
Jim, I think I've got it. All we have to do is quit feeding them. We quit feeding them, they stop breeding.
Now he tells me.
Captain this tribble is dead. And so are these.
A lot of them are dead. A lot of them are alive, but they won't be for long.
The logical assumption is that there is something in the grain.
Yes. Bones, I want the tribbles, the grain, everything analysed. I want to know what killed these tribbles.
I haven't figured out what keeps them alive yet. All right, if I find out anything, I'll let you know. (leaves)
That isn't going to do you any good, Kirk. This project is ruined, and Starfleet is going to hear about it. And when they do, they will have a board of inquiry and they will roast you alive. And I am going to be there, Kirk, to enjoy every minute of it.
Until that inquiry, I'm still the captain. And as Captain, I want two things done. First, find Cyrano Jones, and second (as another tribble hits him on the head) close that door.
Really, Captain Kirk, I must protest this treatment.
Ah, Mister Jones, with an armful. A few questions.
Captain Kirk!
What do you want?
An official apology addressed to the Klingon High Command. I expect you to assume full responsibility for the persecution of Klingon nationals in this quadrant.
An apology?
Yes. You've harassed my men. You've treated them like criminals. You've been most uncourteous, Captain Kirk. If you wish to avoid a diplomatic incident
No, Kirk. You can't let him. That will give them the wedge they need to claim Sherman's Planet.
I believe that more than the word of an aggrieved Klingon commander would be necessary for that, Mister Baris.
Mister Spock, as far as Sherman's Planet is concerned, Captain Kirk has already given it to us.
Well, we'll see about that, but before I take any official action, I'd like to know Just what happened. Who put the tribbles in the quadrotriticale? What was in the grain that killed them?
Captain Kirk, before you go on, may I make a request?
Yes.
Can you get those things out of here?
Remarkable.
Hold on a minute. I thought you said tribbles liked everybody.
They do. I can't understand it. The last time I saw one act this way was at the bar.
What was in the bar?
Klingons. Him, for one. (points at Korax)
You're right, Mister Jones. They don't like Klingons. (McCoy enters) But they do like Vulcans. I didn't know you had it in you.
Obviously tribbles are very perceptive creatures, Captain.
Obviously. Mister Baris, they like you. Well, there's no accounting for taste. (and back to Darvin) They don't like you, Mister Darvin. I wonder why. Bones?
(scanning him) Heartbeat is all wrong. His body temperature is. Jim, this man is a Klingon.
A Klingon?
I wonder what Starfleet Command will say about that. What about the grain, Bones?
Oh, yes. It was poisoned.
Poisoned?
Yes. It's been impregnated with a virus. The virus turns into an inert material in the bloodstream. The more the organism eats, the more inert matter is built up. So after two or three days, they reached a point where they couldn't take in enough nourishment to survive.
They starved to death. In a storage compartment full of grain, they starved to death.
That is essentially it.
Mister Darvin, are you going to talk?
I have nothing to say. (Kirk thrusts the tribbles into his face) All right, I poisoned the grain! Take them away.
And the tribbles had nothing to do with it?
I don't know. I never saw one before in my life, and I hope I never see one of those fuzzy miserable things again.
I'm certain that can be arranged, Darvin. Guards? If you'll excuse me, Captain.
Captain Koloth. About that apology.
Yes?
You have six hours to get your ship out of Federation territory.
You know, I think I could learn to like tribbles.
Well, Captain, I suppose I'm free to go now.
No, you're not. There's something I want to show you. You know what the penalty is for transporting an animal proven harmful to human life?
Captain, one little tribble isn't harmful. Captain, you wouldn't do a thing like that to me, now would you? Would you?
The penalty is twenty years in a rehabilitation colony.
Captain Kirk. Friend. Friend Kirk. Surely we can come to some sort of mutual understanding. After all, my tribbles did put you wise to the poisoned grain, and they did help you to find the Klingon agent. You saved a lot of lives that way.
There is one thing you can do.
Yes?
Pick up every tribble on the space station. If you do that, I'll speak to Mister Lurry about returning your spaceship.
It would take years.
Seventeen point nine, to be exact.
Seventeen point nine years.
Consider it Job security.
Captain, you're a hard man. All right! All right!
You'll do it?
He'll do it.
I'll do it.
Captain, Starfleet was able to divert that freighter.
Good. That means Sherman's Planet will get its quadrotriticale only a few weeks late. I don't see any tribbles around here.
And you won't find a tribble on this entire ship.
Bones, how did you do it?
I cannot take credit for another man's work. Scotty did it.
Scotty! Where are the tribbles?
Oh, er, Captain, it was really Mister Spock's recommendation.
Of course. Spock.
Based on computer analysis, of course, taking into account the possibilities of
Gentlemen, I don't want to interrupt this mutual admiration society, but I'd like to know where the tribbles are.
Tell him, Spock.
Well, it was Mister Scott who performed the actual engineering.
Mister Scott. Where are the tribbles?
I used the transporter, Captain.
You used the transporter?
Aye.
Where did you transport them? Scott, you didn't transport them into space, did you?
Captain Kirk, that'd be inhuman.
Where are they?
I gave them a good home, sir.
(shouting) Where?
I gave them to the Klingons, sir.
(a whisper) You gave them to the Klingons?
Aye, sir. Before they went into warp, I transported the whole kit and caboodle into their engine room, where they'll be no tribble at all.
The Gamesters Of Triskelion
Ensign Chekov, Lieutenant Uhura, and I will beam down and make a routine check of its facilities.
Standard orbit, Captain.
Good. Mind the store, Mister Spock.
Acknowledged, Captain.
Lieutenant Uhura, let's go.
Yes, sir.
Energise, Scotty.
Aye, Captain.
Captain. what happened?
It must be a transporter malfunction.
That was a rough trip.
This isn't Gamma Two. Look at the colour of that sky. (it's green)
This is the craziest landing pad I've ever seen.
That's a trinary sun.
Scott to Bridge.
Spock here.
Mister Spock, the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Chekov. they vanished. They got onto the transporter platform and they just vanished.
I presume you mean they vanished in a manner not consistent with the usual workings of the transporter, Mister Scott.
Aye, of course I mean that. You think I'd call if they just beamed down?
Have you reversed controls?
I've made all the proper checks. There was nothing. There was no flash of light, nothing. They were gone.
Power surge?
Not down here. All the dials were right and the transporter was functioning perfectly.
Recheck your equipment, Mister Scott. I'll scan for them on the planet's surface. Spock out.
But Captain, if we're not on Gamma Two, then where are we?
That's what I'd like to know. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Dead.
Mine, too.
Captain. Look.
Excellent, Captain Kirk. Although we expected strength and competitive spirit, we are greatly pleased.
Either of you hurt?
I don't think so, Captain.
Nobody's hurt, Captain. Yet.
Admirable, Chekov. Admirable. You also, Uhura. Your spirit is as great as the captain's. I can see you all will prove invaluable here. I am Galt, Master Thrall of the planet Triskelion. I have been sent to welcome you.
There, Captain. Now you are prepared for your training.
How do you know our names?
The Providers were expecting you, Captain. They arranged your transportation.
These Providers of yours, are they
Correction, Captain. The Providers are not ours. We are theirs.
What do they want from us?
You are to be trained, of course. What other use is there for thralls?
Thralls? You must be mistaken. We're officers of a United spaceship on Federation business.
There has been no mistake. Your old titles mean nothing here, Captain. You are thralls now. You are to be taken to the training enclosure. (the restraints are released) Come. Places have been prepared for you.
We're not going anywhere until we have some information. Who are you? What is this place? What do you think you're going to do with us?
I am Galt, the Master Thrall. This place is the planet Triskelion. You are to be trained and spend the rest of your lives here.
Mister Spock, I've checked that transporter from one end to the other. Every circuit works perfectly. Whatever that power surge was, it had nothing to do with the transporter or any other system aboard this ship.
I'm beginning to believe that, Mister Scott. I've conducted two sweeps of the planet's surface. There is no sign of life.
Then what the devil is happening? Does that mean their atoms are just floating around out there?
No, Doctor. Even that would show up on our sensors.
Where are they then?
The only answers are negative. No magnetic storms, no ionic interference, no breakdown in your equipment.
A negative attitude is no good to us. We can't just leave them out there, wherever they are.
We shall continue sensor scans, Doctor. At the moment, that is all we can do, except hope for a rational explanation.
Hope? I always thought that was a human failing, Mister Spock.
True, Doctor. Constant exposure does result in a certain degree of contamination.
These are your quarters. Open, thralls.
That was foolish, Captain. Escape is quite impossible, as demonstrated by your collars of obedience. Return to your quarters.
They are not within the confines of this solar system.
It's been nearly an hour. Can people live that long as disassembled atoms in a transporter beam?
I have never heard of a study being done, but it would be a fascinating project.
Fascinating? Those people are friends of ours out there, if they're still alive.
Precisely.
The odds are not good.
No. I would say approximately four hundred
Don't quote odds and don't give me anymore dispassionate logic, Mister Spock. Just keep looking for them.
I would welcome a suggestion, Doctor, even an emotional one, as to where to look.
First time you've ever asked me for anything, and it has to be an occasion like this.
Captain, the Enterprise. They will be trying to find us, won't they?
They'll try, but where do they look? We're here, and we don't know where it is.
This system's star is a trinary. Limits it a bit, but we're a long way from the Enterprise, if we're in the same dimension.
I am your drill thrall. I am called Lars.
What do you want from her?
That is not your concern. Your drill thralls will attend you presently. (he opens Uhura's door and goes in) There is little time.
What are you doing? Get out!
I have been selected for you.
Lieutenant, are you all right? Uhura! Lieutenant! Lieutenant, are you all right? Lieutenant, answer me! Lieutenant! What's happening to Lieutenant Uhura? Lieutenant, are you all right?
It is not allowed to refuse selection.
Captain's log, stardate 3259.2. First Officer Spock in command. The Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Ensign Chekov have been missing for nearly two hours. Computer probability projections are useless due to insufficient data.
(a woman in gold uniform at Spock's station) Mister Spock, I'm getting a fluctuating energy reading on this hydrogen cloud. It's faint, sir, but it consistently reads an excess of predictable energy level.
Interesting. It seems to be an ionisation trail.
What would account for that, Spock?
Exactly the question I have just fed to the computers, Doctor. And the answer is, nothing known to us would account for it.
Well, the transporter has neither the power nor the range to account for that.
Plot a follow course, Ensign Haines.
(now in Chekov's seat) Aye, sir.
You're going to leave here without them and run off on some wild goose chase halfway across the galaxy just because you found a discrepancy in a hydrogen cloud?
Doctor, I am chasing the Captain, Lieutenant Uhura, and Ensign Chekov, not some wild aquatic fowl. This is the only lead we've had.
Course plotted and laid in, Mister Spock. Three ten mark two four one.
Initiate. Warp factor two.
You, you have been selected for me?
(with a deep voice) No. I am only your drill thrall. I have brought you nourishment. It is a nice name, Chee-koo.
Chekov.
Chee-koof! It is a very nice name. I am called Tamoon.
(nervous of her intentions) Oh, pleased, Pleased to know you, miss.
You are a fine specimen. I like you better than the others. I will instruct you well, so my Provider will take you.
That's very kind of you, miss, but
If my Provider is pleased, we may even be selected for each other.
I didn't realise I was so hungry. Whatever you call this, it is very good.
It is nourishment. We call it that.
Nourishment. That's very practical. What do you call this collar?
It is a sign of our Provider. By the colour of the lights it can be known who holds us. When you are vended, you will also have a colour.
Vended? You mean bought, sold.
When you are developed. The Provider who offers the most quatloos puts his colour on us.
Our race has another name for it. Slavery. This collar of obedience, is Galt the only one who can operate it?
It is only to warn and punish.
How does he work it?
It is not permitted to talk of that.
Will you provide all my nourishment?
Of course. I am your drill thrall. I will train you well.
Yes, I'm sure you will. I must say, I've never seen a top sergeant who looked like you.
What does that mean?
It means you're a very beautiful woman.
What is beautiful?
You mean nobody's ever told you that before? well, er, beautiful is, Beautiful. (he holds up the tray so she can see her reflection) That's beautiful. Shahna, where were you born?
Born? I have been here always.
Your parents. Where are they? Your mother and father.
She who bore me was killed in a freestyle match.
Freestyle?
You will learn all these things.
Lars and Chekov's drill thrall. They weren't born here. Where do they come from?
It is not permitted. (a gong sounds and a red light flashes) The exercise interval. This is your training harness. Put it on.
This is ridiculous. There's nothing out there. Nothing at all.
We certainly seem to be heading into an empty sector.
Projecting back along the path of ionisation, the nearest system is M two four alpha.
That must be two dozen light years away.
Eleven point six three zero.
Are you suggesting that they could have transported over a distance of? You're out of your Vulcan mind, Spock.
I'm suggesting nothing, Doctor. I am merely pursuing the only logical course available to us.
Hold. This thrall was slow in obeying a command. For his punishment, he will be practice target. As you charge, you will strike the practice target when you pass. You begin, Uhura.
No!
It is not allowed to refuse a training exercise.
I don't care whether it's allowed or not. I will not do it.
None of us will do it, Galt.
It is part of your training. The Providers wish it.
The devil with the Providers.
Cossacks.
We have been tolerant because you are newcomers, but I see you must be given a lesson. Lars. (Lars unties the thrall) Kloog. Kloog will administer correction. Uhura, take your place on the triad. (Lars starts to tie Uhura's hands behind her back.) Tie her.
No. No! I am responsible for the actions of my people. I demand to see the Providers.
It is not permitted. But, Captain, since you assume responsibility for your people, you will take the punishment. It is less painful than the collar. Turn around. {Lars ties Kirk's hands.) Captain, you will be practice target. It is a shame to lose you, Captain, but it is worth it as an example to the others.
Hold. Rest interval. Fifteen trisecs.
He's pretty fast with that whip.
This will strengthen you. Drink it. Kloog's left eye is weak. Approach him from that side.
Resume places.
Hold.
We hold, Provider One.
Provider One bids three hundred quatloos for the newcomers.
Provider Two, three hundred and fifty quatloos.
Provider Three, four hundred.
One thousand quatloos.
One thousand fifty quatloos.
Two thousand.
(after a pause) Two thousand quatloos are bid. Is there a challenge? The newcomers have been vended to Provider One.
We're free people. We belong to no one.
Such spirit. I wager fifteen quatloos that he is untrainable.
Twenty quatloos that all three are untrainable.
Five thousand quatloos that the newcomers will have to be destroyed.
Accepted. Mark them, Galt.
You now bear the mark of a fine herd. But I must warn you, any further disobedience now that you are full-fledged thralls will be punishable by death.
Mister Spock, it just doesn't make sense they could have come this far. If there's any chance at all it is to continue to search in the area they were lost.
We searched the area.
It's always possible to miss something.
Such as a failure in the transporter mechanism?
No, sir. There was no sign of failure.
There was no sign of them in the area of Gamma Two.
If they weren't there it's ridiculous to think they could still be alive. Not after all this time.
In that case, Doctor, we have nothing to lose by pursuing our present course.
Slow down. Slow down. Wait a minute. Wait a minute. We've covered over two miles. Can we take a breather? A rest?
(not at all out of breath) Oh. Very well. You are tired.
Oh. well, it's good to get away from that development area, even for a while. Shahna, why do the Providers, why do they like to watch others being hurt, killed?
That is the way.
Their voices sound mechanical. Are they computers?
Computers?
You've seen them. Do they have bodies?
Not such as ours.
What is this place?
It is not used.
It's very old. Does it have a name? Shahna, could it have been a city for the Providers?
I do not think it is well to ask such things.
They do have bodies, or did have.
One does not talk of such things.
Very pretty country. Very much like my home planet, Earth.
Planet?
Where I was born. Shahna, don't you ever look at the night sky? The lights up there?
I have looked at them.
Well, those are stars. And around them are planets. And there are people that live on them, Just like us.
How can one live on a flicker of light?
From Earth, Triskelion's three suns are just a flicker of light. Actually, this is the darkest planet I've ever seen.
Dark? But all is lighted. Here, the chambers.
The thralls have no freedom, Shahna. You don't think or do anything but what the Providers tell you.
What else would one do?
Love, for one thing.
What is love?
Love is the most important thing on Earth. Especially to a man and a woman.
We, too, have mates. When it is time to increase the herd, my Provider will select one for me.
On Earth, we select our own mate. Someone we care for. On Earth, men and women live together, help each other, make each other happy.
I do not think your words are allowed.
All right. All right. Tell me about the Providers. What do they look like? Where do they live?
I have never seen them, but they are said not to be like us. They stay in
Stop it. Stop it! I'm responsible! I made her talk! Stop it! You're killing her! She did nothing wrong! It was my fault. If you want to punish someone, punish me! Please.
Is that what you humans call compassion? It is interesting, but it has no value here. You present many interesting aspects, Captain, but you must learn obedience. Then you will be an excellent thrall.
It's all right. It's all right. You can stop crying now, Shahna. It's all right.
You risked bringing their anger on yourself. Why did you do it?
It's the custom of my people to help one another when we're in trouble.
And this. Is this also helping?
You could call it that.
Please, help me once again. (another kiss) I did not know it could be like this between people. Is it always so in the place you come from?
(popping out of thin air) Captain, you do indeed present many surprises. Because you have amused the Providers, there will be no punishment. Return to your quarters.
Mister Scott, can we manage anything faster than warp six?
It's my opinion that we've gone too far as it is, sir.
He's right, Spock. We've lost Jim and the others on Gamma Two. Now you've dragged us a dozen light years on some wild hunch that
Doctor, I do not respond to hunches. No transporter malfunction was responsible for the disappearance. They were not within the Gamma system. A focused beam of extremely high-intensity light was directed into the Gamma system from the trinary system we are now approaching. No known natural phenomena could have caused that beam. Does that clarify the situation?
No, it doesn't. It's still a fancy way of saying that you're playing a hunch. well, my hunch is that they're back on Gamma Two dead or alive and I still want another search.
Doctor McCoy speaks for me, too, sir.
I see. (pause) Gentlemen, I am in command of this vessel, and we shall continue on our present course. (conspiratorial whisper) Unless it is your intention to declare a mutiny.
Mister Spock!
Who said anything about a mutiny, you stubborn, pointed-eared. All right. If we don't find them here, do we still have another search on Gamma Two?
Agreed. Mister Scott, could you manage warp seven?
I would be more than content to do so, sir, and maybe a wee bit more.
Ensign, warp seven.
You're disturbed about what happened today.
Yes. You have made me feel strangely. If it were allowed, I would ask that you have another drill thrall.
I wouldn't like that, Shahna. I wouldn't like that at all.
I'm sorry, Shahna. (takes the magnetic key and unlocks his door)
This is going to kill our romance.
What about Lars?
He's gone to report me. I said I didn't like the food.
I think Galt is the only one who controls these collars. If we can find the phaser that I threw at Lars, we can use the circuits to short out these collars.
(pointing to an exit) Captain.
Only a reminder. You Earth people are most unusual, most stimulating.
Standard orbit.
Sensors indicate only one concentration of life forms on the planet, on the lower hemisphere. Humanoid readings.
Well, at least that gives our landing force a starting point.
There will be no landing force, Doctor. Assuming the captain and the others are still alive, it would be unwise to endanger them by beaming down a large contingent.
Well we're not going to leave them there while we just sit and wait.
Interesting. No power source. It may be shielded.
And it may be just a wild goose chase like we've been telling you.
I shall beam down, Doctor. If I am unable to communicate, a landing party may be necessary.
Well, Mister Spock, if you're going into the lion's den, you'll need a medical officer.
Daniel, as I recall, had only his faith. But I welcome your company, Doctor. Mister Scott, you'll be in command.
Aye, sir.
No, Mister Spock, you will not leave the ship.
None of your control systems will operate.
What the devil's going on?
Spock? Spock!
Spock?
Welcome to Triskelion, gentlemen.
By now it must be obvious to you that you have been expected.
What the voice said was true, sir. Nothing is functioning.
Commendations, gentlemen. Your ingenuity in discovering the whereabouts of your companions is noteworthy.
What you're hearing, gentlemen, is a Provider.
We are known to the thralls as Providers because we provide for all their needs. The term is easier for their limited mental abilities to comprehend.
Providing for all their needs means using thralls, people stolen from other parts of the galaxy
To fight each other, and the Providers gamble on the winner.
Fascinating.
But these Providers haven't the courage to show themselves.
Your species has great curiosity.
We knew that. You are interesting in many ways.
But you are afraid.
You present no danger while you wear the collar
And you wear it as long as you live.
Then show yourselves.
There is no objection.
The power source. Shielded by solid rock.
(a brain pulsates red) We are one thousand of your metres beneath the surface.
Primary mental evolution. Incredible.
(pulsing green) That is not true, Captain. Once we had humanoid form, but we evolved beyond it.
(yellow) Through eons of devoting ourselves exclusively to intellectual pursuits, we became the physically simple, mentally superior creatures you see before you.
A species that enslaves other beings is hardly superior, mentally or otherwise.
The thralls are necessary to the games. We have found athletic competitions our only challenge, the only thing which furnishes us with purpose.
It's an unproductive purpose, unworthy of your intellect.
We use only inferior beings.
We have found that all life forms in the galaxy are capable of superior development. Perhaps you're not as evolved as you believe.
An interesting speculation, Captain. You and your people are most challenging.
Yes, most challenging. It was hoped that such new blood would stimulate our stock of thralls. How unfortunate that you must be destroyed.
Our destruction will result only in your own. You may control the Enterprise, but you cannot match the force of the entire Federation.
Your ship will be destroyed by a magnetic storm. No communications with your base will be possible. Your fate will remain a mystery to your people.
And you call yourselves superior! You're murderers without the spirit to really wager for the lives you take.
Wager? Explain yourself, Captain.
My people pride themselves on being the greatest, most successful gamblers in the universe. We compete for everything. Power, fame, women, everything we desire, and it is our nature to win. And for proof, I offer you our exploration of this galaxy.
We are aware of your competitive abilities, Captain.
Well, then, I wager that with weapons of your own choice, right here and now, my people can overcome an equal number of thralls set against us.
A hundred quatloos on the newcomers.
Four hundred quatloos against the newcomers.
Two hundred quatloos against!
Five hundred for the newcomers. Contest by multiple elimination.
Wait! Wait! Hear me! We can't wager for trifles like quatloos. The stakes must be higher.
Name your stakes, Captain.
If we win, the Enterprise and its crew leaves here in safety. Further more, all the thralls on the planet must be freed.
Anarchy. They would starve.
You will educate and train them to establish a normal self-governing culture.
Thralls govern themselves? Ridiculous!
We have done the same with cultures throughout the galaxy. Are you willing to admit that we can do something you can't?
There is nothing we cannot do!
And if you lose, Captain?
If we lose? We will remain here, the entire crew of the Enterprise. The most stubborn, determined competitors in the universe. We'll become thralls, enter your games, obey your orders without rebellion. You'll be assured of generations of the most exciting wagering you've ever had.
Your stakes are indeed high, Captain.
Not for true gamesters.
We will accept your stakes on one condition.
Name it.
As leader of your people, your spirit seems most indomitable. We suggest you alone, pitted against three contestants of our choosing.
Three against one? Those are pretty high odds.
Not for true gamesters, Captain.
Your, your terms are unfair.
On the contrary, they're extremely fair, since your alternative is death.
Well, in that case, I'll accept your terms.
Galt will prepare you.
Because you wager your skill for all your people, they will be permitted to watch the outcome of the game on the ship's viewscreen.
Mister Spock, look!
Captain, you will defend. Thralls must stay in the blue area. You will take the yellow. Touching an opposing colour deprives a contestant of one weapon. An opponent must be killed to be removed from the game. If only wounded, he is replaced by a fresh thrall. Is that clear, Captain?
Yes, that's clear.
What in the name of heaven is this?
Heaven's got very little to do with this.
Shahna.
You lied. Everything you said.
The thralls surrender!
You have won, Captain Kirk, unfortunately. However, the terms of the wager will be honoured. You are free. Remove your collars.
The thralls will be trained?
They will be trained. We have said it.
I think you'll find it a much more exciting game than the one you've been playing. I'm sorry, Shahna. I didn't lie. I did what was necessary. Someday, I hope you'll understand.
I understand, a little. You will leave us now?
Yes.
To go back to the lights in the sky?
Yes.
I would like to go to those lights with you. Take me?
I can't.
Then teach me how, and I will follow you.
There's so much you must learn here first. The Providers will teach you. Learn it, Shahna. all your people must learn before you can reach for the stars. Shahna. (he gives her a farewell kiss) Scotty!
Aye, sir.
Beam us up.
Goodbye, Jim Kirk. I will learn, and watch the lights in the sky, and remember.
A Piece Of The Action
Approaching Sigma Iotia Two, Captain.
Standard orbit, Mister Chekov.
Captain, I have received vocal contact from an official station. They relayed us to a man named Oxmyx. His title is Boss.
Boss? All right, Lieutenant, put him on. Oxmyx. This is Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the Federation of Planets.
Hello, Captain. You're from the same outfit as the Horizon?
Yes. Unfortunately, the Horizon was lost with all hands shortly after leaving your planet. We only received her radio report last month.
Last month? What are you talking about? The Horizon left here a hundred years ago.
Difficult to explain. We received a report a hundred years late because it was sent by conventional radio. Your system is on the outer reaches of the galaxy. They didn't have subspace communication in those days.
Toward the edge of what?
I'll explain it in more detail when I see him. The ship won't land, but we'll transport several people down. Well, that's a little difficult for you to understand, too. I'll explain it in more detail when I see you. Where will be convenient?
Well, there's an intersection just at the end of the block, near a yellow fire plug. Think you can find it?
Scotty, do you have the co-ordinates?
Located, sir.
Fine. Fine. I'll have a reception committee there to meet you.
Good. I'll be looking forward to it. Kirk out. Scotty, you have the conn.
Spock, McCoy, we're beaming down. Standard equipment.
The Horizon's contact came before the Non-Interference Directive went into effect.
They must have interfered with the normal evolution of the planet.
It will be interesting to see the results of the contamination.
We don't know there is contamination. The evidence is only circumstantial.
What was the state of the Iotian culture before the Horizon came?
The beginnings of industrialisation.
Horizon reports indicate the Iotians are extremely intelligent and somewhat imitative.
So we're going down to recontaminate them.
The damage has been done, Doctor. We are here to repair it.
Let's not argue about it. Let's go study it. Energise.
Fascinating.
This is like coming home.
Home was never like this. I've seen pictures of the old days that look like this.
Interesting, Captain. Passers-by are carrying, I believe, firearms.
(in a brown suit) Okay, you three, let's see you petrify.
Sir, would you mind explaining that statement, please?
I want to see you turn to stone. Put your hands over your head, or you ain't going to have no head to put your hands over.
What's this?
That's a weapon. Be careful with that.
A heater, huh? Hey, the boss will love that. (puts it in his pocket)
Look, we were asked to come down here by Mister Oxmyx. He said
I know what he said, bud. He said some of the boys would meet you. Okay, we're meeting you.
Well, those firearms are not necessary.
You trying to make trouble?
Who, me?
Don't give me those baby blue eyes.
What?
I don't go for that innocent routine.
Sir, does everyone here carry firearms?
I never heard such stupid questions in my life.
Well, since this Oxmyx asked us down here, don't you think we should see him?
All right. Get moving. Down the street.
Krako's getting more gall all the time .
Is this how you greet all your guests?
It happens, pal.
That man's dead back there.
Yeah? We ain't playing for peanuts. What's the matter, you guys never saw a hit before?
Sir, there are several questions I would like to ask.
Ask the boss. I don't know nothing. Get moving.
This is the contamination you're looking for, Jim.
Yes, but the Horizon crew wasn't composed of cold-blooded killers. They didn't report this culture in this state, either. What happened?
Write him a letter.
Get lost, will ya? Some people got nothing to do but complain.
Is this the way your citizens do business, their right of petition?
They pay their percentages and the boss takes care of them.
(a silver haired man in a suit) Hit that button. (the girl sitting on his desk obeys) Yeah?
Got them, Boss. No sweat.
All right. Bring them in. (he goes to the pool table and picks up a cue) Which one of you is the captain?
Depends.
Make yourself a drink, Captain. It's good stuff. I distill it myself.
No, thank you. You're Mister Oxmyx.
That's me, pal.
This is my first officer, Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy.
Doctor, huh? Put that chopper down, Kalo. These guys are our guests. Pick up a cue, Captain. Go ahead. You can't be too careful around here these days.
Yes. Judging from what we've seen so far, I agree.
They call you The Boss, Mister Oxmyx. The boss of what?
The boss of my territory. I got the biggest in the world. You know, there's one thing wrong with having the biggest. There's always some punk trying to cut you out. That's why you can't be too careful.
You're the government here?
What government? Look, I told you. I got the territory and I run it. That's all.
But there are other bosses, other territories?
Yeah, sure. Maybe a dozen or so, not counting the small fry, but then they get burned anyway soon as I get around to it.
Does that include, if I may ask, a gentleman called Krako?
How do you know about Krako?
He hit us, Boss.
Okay. You hit him back, you hear? Hard.
I'll take care of it.
Captain? Gangsters. Chicago. Mobs. Published in 1992. Where'd you get this?
Hey, wait a minute. That's the Book.
I know it's a book.
The Book. They left it, the other ship. The Horizon.
This is the contamination, Captain. Astonishing. An entire culture based on this.
You said they were imitative, and the book
I don't want any more cracks about the Book.
Did they leave any other books?
Sure. Some text books on how to make radio sets and stuff like that, but, look, I brought you here so you could help me, not for you to ask me questions. After that, I'll answer anything you want to know.
What is it you want?
Well, I was thinking. You Feds must have made a lot of improvements since that other ship came here. You probably got all kinds of fancy heaters up there. So here's the deal. You give me all the heaters I need. Enough tools so I can knock off those punks all at once. Then I'll take over, and all you'll have to do is deal with me.
Now let me get this straight. You want us to supply you with arms and assistance so you can carry out an aggression against your neighbours?
What aggression? I got to make hits. I want you to help me hit them. That's all.
Fascinating, but quite impossible.
Mister Oxmyx, my orders are quite explicit. Under no circum
I ain't interested in your orders. From now on, you're gonna take orders from me. I'm gonna give you just eight hours to give me the things I want. If I don't have those tools by then, I'm gonna call up your ship and have them pick you up in a box. Is that understood, pal?
Hey, Boss, this here's a heater, and I don't know what this is. (tosses them to his leader)
Let's see how this thing works.
Don't do that. You could knock out the side of the building.
That good, huh? All you have to do is give me about a hundred of these fancy heaters and we'll have no more trouble.
Out of the question.
Captain Kirk, I usually get what I want. What's this thing? (silence) All right. Burn him.
Hold it. It's a communication device.
How does it work?
It's locked onto my ship's systems.
Kalo, take them to the warehouse and put them in a bag. Keep a sharp eye on them, you hear.
In the bag, Boss. Come on.
(into communicator) Hey, you. In the ship up there.
Hey, you in the ship.
Scott here. Who's this?
This is Bela Oxmyx. I got your captain and his friends down here. You want to see them alive
Again you'll send me down a hundred of these fancy heaters you've got, and some troops to show me how to use them.
Am I to understand that you're holding the captain and his party?
You heard right, pal. I'm going to give you just eight hours to get me the goods I want, or I put the hit on your friends.
You understand?
I don't know. (Oxmyx ends the transmission, laughing) Lieutenant Hadley, check the language banks and find out what a heater is.
One book on the gangs of Chicago did all this. It's amazing.
They evidently seized upon that one book as the blueprint for an entire society.
It's the Bible.
In old Chicago, conventional government almost broke down. The gangs nearly took over.
Yeah, well, Oxmyx is the worst gangster of all.
We may quarrel with Mister Oxmyx' methods, but his goal is essentially the correct one. This society must become united or it will degenerate into total anarchy.
If this society broke down as the result of the Horizon's influence, then the Federation's responsible, and we've got to do something to straighten this mess out. Spock, if you could get to the sociological computer, do you think you could find a solution?
Unfortunately, I do not have access to my computers, nor are these gentlemen likely to permit it.
Well, I've got an idea about that. (goes over to the card table and gets guns pointed at him) Gentlemen. Gentlemen. This, card game is a kid's game.
You think so, huh?
Oh, yes, yes. I wouldn't waste my time.
Who's asking you?
On Beta Antares Four, they play a real game. It's a man's game, but of course it's probably a little beyond you. It requires intelligence.
Listen, Kirk, I can play anything you can figure out. Take the cards, big man. Show us how it's played.
I'm familiar with the culture on Beta Antares. There aren't games
Spock. Spock. (sits) Of course, the cards on Beta Antares Four are different, but not too different. The name of the game is called fizzbin.
Fizzbin?
Fizzbin. It's not too difficult. (begins dealing) Each player gets six cards, except for the player on the dealer's right, who gets seven.
On the right.
Yes. The second card is turned up, except on Tuesdays.
On Tuesday.
Oh, look what you got, two jacks. You got a half fizzbin already.
I need another jack.
No, no. If you got another jack, why, you'd have a sralk.
A sralk?
Yes. You'd be disqualified. You need a king and a deuce, except at night of course, when you'd need a queen and a four.
Except at night.
Right. Oh, look at that. You've got another jack. How lucky you are! How wonderful for you. If you didn't get another jack, if you'd gotten a king, why then you'd get another card, except when it's dark, you'd give it back.
If it were dark on Tuesday.
Yes, but what you're after is a royal fizzbin, but the odds in getting a royal fizzbin are astron. Spock, what are the odds in getting a royal fizzbin?
I have never computed them, Captain.
Well, they're astronomical, believe me. Now, for the last card. We'll call it a kronk. You got that?
What?
I'll get it.
Spock, find the radio station. Uhura's monitoring the broadcasts. Cut in and have yourselves beamed up to the ship.
Surely, you're coming, Captain.
I will, but I'm bringing Bela Oxmyx with me.
Jim, you can't
Bones, this mess is our responsibility. You have your orders. Let's go.
Hold it! Okay, pally, we're going for a ride.
If you don't mind, I'd rather walk.
Listen, pally, this could either be a taxi or a hearse. You know what I mean?
I'm beginning to get the idea.
You do that very well. Now, how are you with primitive radio equipment?
Very simple. Amplitude modulation transmission. I simply adjust the frequency, throw this switch, and the Enterprise should answer.
That was the Jailbreakers with their latest recording on Request Time, brought to you by Bang-Bang, the makers of the sweetest little automatic in the world
Fascinating.
And very simple.
Let me see. (throws a few more switches and picks up the microphone.) Enterprise, this is Mister Spock.
Lieutenant Uhura here, Mister Spock.
Mister Spock, what are you doing on this frequency?
A very long and complicated story, Lieutenant. Notify the transporter room, Two to beam up, these co-ordinates.
So you're the Fed, huh? Well, well, well, well, well.
And you?
Krako. JoJo Krako. I'm the head of the whole Southside Territory. Hey, glad to see you.
Would you mind telling me how you even know who I am?
Sit down, Kirk. I've got all of Bela's communications bugged. He can't make a date with a broad unless I know about it. Well, I guess you want to know why I brought you here.
You want to make a deal.
Hey, I like that. That is sharp. That's sharp, eh, Zabo?
Sharp, Boss.
That's right, a deal. I want you to help me.
Let me guess. You want, you'll want heaters, and then you'll want troops to teach them how to use them. And then you'll attack the other bosses and take over the whole planet. Then we'll sit down and talk, right?
Wrong! I know Bela. He didn't offer you beans. Now, me, I'm a reasonable man. You give me what I want and I'll cut you in for, say, a third. Skimmed right off the top. Well, what do you think?
I got a better idea. This planet has to be united. You know that. Bela knows that. Let's sit down. You, me, Bela. Discuss this whole matter, contact the other bosses, and talk about it like reasonable men.
You watch it, Kirk. The Book tells us how to handle things. (snaps his fingers to recall the girl) You make hits. Somebody argues, you lean on 'em. What do you think, we're stupid or something?
No, I don't think you're stupid. I just think your behaviour is arrested.
I haven't been arrested in my whole life! Listen, pally, I know how to get what I want. You want to live, don't you, Kirk? You bet you do. But after I get through with you, you're liable to be sorry unless you come across. Hold him here. Tell Cirl the Knife to sharpen up his blade. I just might have a job for him. Unless you come across with the heaters.
I'm sorry, Krako. No deal.
That's too bad. Put him on ice!
Well?
Futile, Doctor. No specifics. There is no record of such a culture based on a moral inversion.
You mean you're giving up?
No, Doctor. I'm merely saying the computers can offer us no logical, rational, factual way out of our current dilemma.
Mister Spock, Mister Oxmyx is making contact from the surface.
On audio, Lieutenant. Mister Oxmyx, this is Mister Spock.
Huh? Hey, how'd you get back up there?
Irrelevant, since we are here.
Oh, yeah. I tell you, you'd better come on back down.
Krako's put the bag on your captain.
Why would he put a bag on our captain?
Kidnapped him, you dope.
He'll scrag him, too.
If I understand you correctly, that would seem to be a problem.
Look, you guys got something I want. I can help you get your captain back.
Then we can talk about the deal I want.
I'm afraid I find it difficult to trust you, Mister Oxmyx.
What's to trust? Business is business. We'll call a truce. You come on down.
My boys'll spring Kirk, and then we'll talk about giving me a hand.
You'll show no further hostility?
I'm a businessman, pally. What do ya say?
Since we must have our captain back, I accept.
We shall arrive in your office within ten minutes. Spock out.
You mean you're going to trust him?
If we are to save the captain without blatant, forceful interference on this planet, Doctor, we must have the assistance of someone indigenous. We are therefore forced to trust Mister Oxmyx.
Help me! Help! Help me!
Mister Scott, though we hope to avoid interference, I suggest you set one of our phaser banks on a strong stun position.
Aye, sir.
Now you're beginning to make sense.
I trust we shall not have to use them, but it is best to be prepared. Energise.
You know what to do.
Don't worry, Boss. They can't do nothing till they're through sparkling.
Just the same, you be careful. They'll have heaters on them. (to his girl) Now you watch this.
(taking the phasers) Pick up many more of these, I won't need your co-operation.
Mister Oxmyx, I understood we had an arrangement, a truce.
I was hoping you'd think that, dummy.
We're trying to help you, Oxmyx.
Nobody helps nobody but himself.
Sir, you are employing a double negative.
Huh?
I fail to see why you do not understand us. You yourself have stated the need for unity of authority on this planet. We agree.
Yeah, but I got to be the unity.
Co-operation, sir, would inevitably result
The most co-operative man in this world is a dead man. And if you don't keep your mouth shut, you're going to be co-operatin'.
Drop the guns. Drop 'em. (McCoy and Spock take back their phasers) Move down there.
Hey, Captain, you got away from Krako. You know, that ain't easy.
I thought you were supposed to report to the ship, Mister Spock.
We did, Captain. The situation required our return.
It may be just as well. Did you find out anything from the computer?
Nothing useful. Logic and practical information do not seem to apply here.
You admit that?
To deny the facts would be illogical, Doctor.
Then you don't mind if I play a hunch?
I'm not sanguine about hunches, Captain, but I have no practical alternative.
What are we going to do now, Jim?
Well, now that we have Bela, I'm going to put the bag on Krako. (grabs the guy in a blue suit) Listen, you. Say, that's nice material.
It ought to be. It cost a bundle.
Hey!
I said.
Now just a minute.
You too! Get out of the clothes. Nobody's going to put the bag on me any more.
Wheels, Mister Spock.
A fliwer, Captain.
Key in the ignition. Turn the ignition on. And nothing happens. Where's the starter? There's the starter. Yes!
Interesting.
(pushing the gear lever and making grinding noises) Oops! Gears.
Yes. Oh. I believe they had a device known as a clutch. Clutch, Captain. Perhaps one of those pedals on the floor.
(puts it quietly into gear) I kind of like this. I'm going to get one myself.
Captain, you are an excellent starship commander, but as a taxi driver you leave much to be desired.
It was that bad?
Now, that could be a bit of a problem. If they were inside, where they couldn't be seen, we could stun them with our phasers, but not out here.
If we can get close enough to them, we should be able to render them harmless with reasonable rapidity.
They don't look like the trusting type.
(runs over to them) It's a hit, ain't it?
I beg your pardon?
You're going to hit somebody. Can I watch?
Young man, run along and play.
Where'd you get them ears?
Young man
You going to hit Krako out here? You open up and you'll be scragged from every window in the street. I can fix it for ya.
Young man, this is likely to be quite hazardous.
Hold on, Spock. Out of the mouths of babes
Who you callin' a babe?
I'm calling you a babe.
You calling me a babe? (brandishes his little knife.)
Yeah I'm calling you a babe, but there's nothing personal in it. Sit down. (on the car bumper) You know a way we can get close to them?
Sure.
How?
What's in it for me?
What do you want?
A piece of the action.
You do not even know what the action is going to be.
I figure it's got to be a thick percentage or you wouldn't be trying to hit Krako.
Logical.
All right, young man. We'll guarantee you a piece of the action if we can pull this thing off.
Is that a contract?
Done. (they shake on it) What do we do?
You'll know what to do.
And that! And how do you like that? Think you can gang up on me, huh? What are you, chicken?
Come on, why don't you gang up on me? I'll cut off your head and throw it in your face! Take that, and that, and falls over) Daddy, Daddy, I hurt myself!
That's it. Let's go.
What's the matter? Did you hurt yourself, kid?
I want my daddy!
Cute kid, ain't he?
Daddy! I want my daddy!
Sonny!
I want my daddy.
Sonny! Wait a moment. What have they done? What have they done to you? What have you done?
A piece of the action.
No one can see. Put your phaser on stun.
Well, ain't this nice? I was wondering how I was going to get you back, and here you deliver yourself! Who's your friend with the ears, Kirk?
I think you've got it reversed, Mister Krako.
I ain't, pally. Put down your heaters.
Captain, I believe that perhaps it would be wise to do as he says. I just heard the sound of
The sound of a machine gun bolt being pulled back. (there are two more guards behind them.) (JoJo is shaking a phaser to make it work.)
Mister Krako, I don't, er
So this is the fancy heater, huh? How does it work?
I'm trying to tell you, Mister Krako, that this is bigger than you, Oxmyx or anyone.
The only thing I want you to tell me is how it works.
Can you trust all your men?
Of course I can!
Well, one of these can make a man a pretty big boss, you know.
I either trust 'em, or they're dead. Let's go in here and talk about it.
Now we got no busy little eyes to worry about. How does this thing work?
All right, Krako, we don't have time to show you how to play with toys! (takes the phaser back)
Toys?
What do you think we're here for, to get a cut of your deal? Forget it. That's peanuts to an outfit like the Federation. Right?
Unquestionably.
Right?
Right.
Now look, Krako, we're taking over the whole ball of wax. You co-operate with us and maybe we'll cut you in for a piece of the action.
A miniscule. A very small piece.
How much is that?
That's, er. We'll figure it out later.
I thought you guys had laws. No interference.
Who's interfering? We're taking over. Check?
Right.
The planet is being taken over by the Federation, but we don't want to come in here and use our muscle, you know what I mean? That ain't subtle. So what we do is we help one guy take over the planet. He pulls the strings, and then we pull his. (to Spock) Hey, you, sit down.
What's your cut?
What do you care as long as you're being cut in? Course, there's always Bela Oxmyx.
All right, it's a deal. Call your ship. Bring down your boys and whatever else you need.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise. Scott here.
All right, Scotty. We made a deal with Krako.
We did, sir?
Yeah. We're ready to make the hit. We're taking over the whole planet as soon as you get ready.
Do you think that's wise, sir?
Sure. We can trust Krako, but we don't have any choice. You know what I mean? He's standing about twelve feet in front of me, all ready to be our pal.
Of course, Scotty, I'd like to show him the ship, just to show him that we're, er, we're on the level. But you know how it is.
Aye. I know indeed.
Scotty, we'll need phasers to equip every one of Krako's men. We'll need advisors and troops to back him up on the hit. You got all that, Scotty?
Aye, Captain.
Captain. We're preparing everything. It'll be ready when you give the word.
You may begin, Mister Scott.
Acknowledged, Captain.
You mean you're going to start sending down your boys now?
Not exactly.
Right?
Check.
How the hell'd I get here? What? What happened? (Scott enters) You. You must be that Scott fellow Kirk was talking to. I want to know what happened.
It looks like we put the bag on you, doesn't it.
I got rights.
You've got nothing. You mind your place, mister, or you'll be wearing concrete galoshes.
You mean cement overshoes?
Er. Aye.
Must we?
It's faster than walking.
But not as safe.
Are you afraid of cars?
Not at all, Captain. It's your driving that alarms me.
Spock, I've got the hang of it. Now go on.
(waking up) Oh, not again. (rouses the other man) Hey, wake up. You all right? (opens the door) Hey, you guys. Come in here. The Feds snatched Krako. I never seen anything like it. They're going to move in unless we stop 'em now.
Yeah? How?
Well, Bela's mixed up in this somehow. I've got a sneaking hunch they're going to high-tail it back to his territory. You know what we're going to do? We're going to hit his place.
Where are they?
Knowing Krako, he'll probably send them back on a blotter.
Wrong again, Oxmyx.
Jim.
Knock it off, Sawbones. I want to talk to this creep. Now listen, I'm getting tired of playing pattycake with you penny-ante operators.
What do you mean, penny-ante operator?
You're a penny-ante operator. Sit down. All right, Spocko, cover him. Now listen, sweetheart. The Federation's moving in, taking over. You play ball, we'll cut you in. You don't, you're out. All the way out. You know what I mean?
Yeah, sure. Why didn't you say so in the first place? All you had to do was explain it to me.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise. Scott here, sir.
You got Krako on ice?
Aye, he's here. Mad enough
To chew neutronium, but behaving himself.
Okay, baby. Cool him till I flag you.
Flag me?
Keep him until I send for him. We're going to make some old-style phone calls from this locale. So you locate the man on the other end of the blower and give him a ride to this flop.
What?
Find the man at the other end of the phone
And transport him to these co-ordinates.
Can do, sweetheart?
Can do, Captain.
Standing by.
Now you. Get on the blower and call the other bosses.
I sure don't know what you think you're talking about.
Get with it. I'm giving the orders here.
Hello. Hello?
Scotty?
Scott here.
Guess who?
Lock in and energise.
Yeah, you bet your life I've got a lot of nerve. What are you going to do about it?
Coming over with my boys and we (realises he's not where he was a second earlier) Mother.
Hey, Captain, that ain't bad.
Yeah.
I would advise you to keep dialing, Oxmyx.
All right. You know what to do. We hit Bela's place and nobody comes out alive. All right. Let's go.
All right! All right! All right! All right! Now the Federation's taking over whether you like it or not. You people, you've been running this planet like a piecework factory. From now on, it's going to be under one roof. You're going to run it like a business. That means you're going to make a profit.
And what's your percentage?
I'm cutting the Federation in for forty percent. You got any objections?
Yeah! I hear a lot of talk, but all I see here is you and a couple of your boys. I don't see no Federation.
Listen. They got a ship. I know. I was there.
Wait a minute. Wait a minute. Tepo's got a point. All we ever seen is them.
What, a couple of boys?
I'm not going to believe my eyes.
Hang on a minute. Hang on a minute. Quiet! Just a moment!
Let me say something. I only saw three guys in that ship. Maybe there ain't no more.
There are over four hundred guys there.
That's your story, buster.
Hey, it's my boys. They're making a hit at this place.
My boys will put you down.
Want to bet? (gets the gun off McCoy) Keep moving. One move out of you two, I'll drill them. Give me the hardware.
Hey, that's great, Krako. Now we got hostages again. We can make a deal with the Feds up there.
Are you kidding? This one's all mine. From now on, nobody's going no place. I'm going to be the big boss in this here territory.
Now, wait a minute. Wait a minute. Get that heater down. Don't you want to take a look at what you're going to fight?
I already seen it. You're nothing, Fed.
All right, but at least let me call my ship one last time and say goodbye.
Well, all right. Go ahead. Don't get smart.
Hello, Scotty. This is Kirk.
Enterprise. Scott here, sir.
Scotty, put the ship's phasers on stun. Fire a burst in a one-block radius around these co-ordinates.
Right away, sir. Scott out.
Gee, that's some trick.
Hey, did you see that?
They're not dead, just knocked out for a while. But they might just as well have been that way if we wanted them to.
Okay, okay, Kirk, so we get the message. Now, what was this syndicate deal you were talking about?
He was talking about a percentage.
I was talking about both.
Okay. A syndicate makes sense to me. I'm a peaceful man at heart, but I'm sick and tired of all these hits. I hit Krako, Krako hits Tepo, Tepo hits me. There's too many bosses. We can't get anything done.
Hey, Bela, no, no, no. The Federation can't get connected with a small-time operation like this. No, I was thinking, Bela, you would be the top boss. Krako, you'd be his lieutenant. The rest of you, I don't want any trouble from the rest of you because you'll have to answer to the Federation. We'll be back every year to collect our cut.
Look, you figure maybe forty percent's enough?
Yeah, I think forty percent's sufficient.
It's reasonable. It sounds reasonable. That sound reasonable to you?
It's reasonable, Mister Oxmyx. Let's break out some of your drinking stuff and celebrate the syndicate.
Gentlemen, you two have been brooding ever since we returned to the ship.
Brooding, Captain?
Brooding, Mister Spock. A sombre, emotional state. Now, do you wish to continue it or are you going to discuss it?
Captain, I'm neither brooding nor sombre. But I do have reservations about your solution to the problem of the Iotians.
Ah, yes. I understand that. You don't think it's logical to leave a criminal organisation in charge.
Highly irregular, to say the least, Captain. I'm also curious as to how you propose to explain to Starfleet Command that a starship will be sent each year to collect our cut.
Yes, that's a very good question, Mister Spock. I propose our cut be put into the planetary treasury and used to guide the Iotians into a more ethical system. Despite themselves, they'll be forced to accept conventional responsibilities. Isn't that logical? All right, Bones, in the language of the planet, what's your beef?
I don't know how serious this is, Jim, and I don't quite know how to tell you
Go ahead.
But in all the confusion I
Tell me.
I think I left it in Bela's office.
You left it?
Somewhere. I'm not certain.
You're not certain of what?
I left my communicator.
In Bela's office?
Captain. If the Iotians, who are very bright and imitative people, should take that communicator apart
They will, they will. And they'll find out how the transtator works.
The transtator is the basis for every important piece of equipment that we have.
Everything.
You really think it's that serious?
Serious? Serious, Bones? It upsets the whole percentage.
How do you mean?
Well, in a few years, the Iotians may demand a piece of our action.
The Immunity Syndrome
The crew has performed excellently, but is exhausted. And I, too, am looking forward to a nice period of rest on some lovely planet.
Captain. There was a message from Starbase Six. Heavy interference. All I get is Intrepid and what sounded like a sector co-ordinate.
Interesting. No indications of magnetic storms in this sector.
Try another channel, Lieutenant.
Aye, sir.
The Intrepid is manned by Vulcans, isn't it?
Yes, that's right, Bones.
Enterprise calling Starbase Six. Enterprise calling Starbase Six. Come in. Come in.
Spock?
What is it, Spock? Are you in pain?
Captain, the Intrepid. It just died. And the four hundred Vulcans aboard, all dead.
Come on, Spock, let's go down to Sickbay.
Doctor, I know what I know.
Get to the Sickbay.
Captain.
No, no, no. That's an order.
Yes, sir.
Captain, I have Starbase Six readable now. Switching to audio, sir.
Kirk here. Go ahead.
Sir, the Enterprise just completed an exhausting mission. We're on our way in for R and R. There must be another starship in that sector.
Order acknowledged. Kirk out. Mister Kyle, you heard the order. Set course for Gamma Seven-A, warp five.
Aye, sir.
Captain I have just completed a full long-range scan of Gamma Seven-A system. It is dead.
Dead? It's a fourth magnitude sun. There are billions of inhabitants there.
It is dead.
I assure you, Doctor, I am quite all right. The pain was momentary. It passed quickly.
All of my instruments seem to agree with you if I can trust these crazy Vulcan readings. Spock, how can you be so sure the lntrepid was destroyed?
I sensed it die.
But I thought you had to be in physical contact with a subject before
Doctor, even I, a half-Vulcan, could hear the death scream of four hundred Vulcan minds crying out over the distance between us.
Not even a Vulcan could feel a starship die.
Call it a deep understanding of the way things happen to Vulcans, but I know not a person, not even the computers on board the Intrepid, knew what was killing them or would have understood it had they known.
But four hundred Vulcans?
I've noticed that about your people, Doctor. You find it easier to understand the death of one than the death of a million. You speak about the objective hardness of the Vulcan heart, yet how little room there seems to be in yours.
Suffer the death of thy neighbour, eh, Spock? You wouldn't wish that on us, would you?
It might have rendered your history a bit less bloody.
Spock, you may have been right. We've lost contact with the Intrepid and we're out of communication with an entire solar system. Any update from Starfleet?
I cannot filter out the distortion, sir. It's getting worse.
Captain, deflector shields just snapped on.
Slow to warp three.
Warp three, sir.
Indications of energy turbulence ahead. Unable to analyse. I've never encountered readings like this before.
Scanners on. Magnification three on the screen.
Magnification factor three, sir.
Exactly what are we looking for, Mister Spock?
I would assume that.
What is that?
Perhaps an interstellar dust cloud.
Not very likely, Ensign.
No. You'd be able to see stars through a dust cloud. Looks like a hole in space. Readings, Mister Spock.
Still not able to analyse, Captain. Sensors are feeding data to the computers now. Whatever this dark zone is, it lies directly in line with the course I calculate for the Intrepid and the Gamma Seven-A system.
Hold present course. Slow to warp one.
Warp factor one, sir.
Mister Chekov, prepare to launch a telemetry probe into that zone. Direct computer feed to Mister Spock.
Aye, sir. Probe ready. Switching data feed to library computer.
Launch probe.
Probe launched, sir.
What was that?
The telemetry probe, sir. There's no signal from it.
Speculation, Spock.
I have none, Captain. Insufficient data.
Lieutenant.
I'm just dizzy. I'll be all right. I'm fine, sir.
Sickbay to Captain Kirk. McCoy here.
Kirk here. What is it?
I'm getting reports from every deck. Half the people on this ship just fainted.
Uhura almost did. She says she's all right. Do you want to see her?
Not unless she's feeling ill. I've got an emergency here.
What's wrong?
There's nothing organic. They all seem to be nervous, weak, and irritable. They say it happened suddenly, like a balloon popping.
Can you handle it, Bones?
I'm giving them stimulants to keep them on their feet.
Yeah, we can handle it, Jim.
Good. Kirk out. Hold our position, Mister Kyle.
Aye, aye, sir.
Spock, give me an update on the dark area ahead.
No analysis due to insufficient information.
No speculation, no information, nothing. I've asked you three times for information on that, and you've been unable to supply it. Insufficient data is not sufficient, Mister Spock. You're the science officer. You're supposed to have sufficient data all the time.
I am well aware of that, Captain, but the computers contain nothing on this phenomenon. It is beyond our experience, and the new information is not yet significant.
I don't know about you but I'm tired. If you can't tell me what it is, let's use reverse logic. Perhaps it'll help if you tell me what it isn't.
It is not liquid, gaseous, or solid, despite the fact we cannot see through it.
So far that's not much help.
It is not a galactic nebula such as the Coal Sack, and since our deflectors were activated by it, it would seem to be some form of energy, but nothing our sensors can identify.
Is it possible that this is what killed that solar system and the Intrepid?
Very possible.
Lieutenant.
Yes, sir.
Notify the Starfleet that we're going to attempt to probe the area of darkness to gain further information.
Aye, aye, sir.
Captain?
I'm all right. Distance from zone of darkness, Mister Kyle?
One hundred thousand kilometres, sir.
Ahead slow. Impulse power only.
Aye, aye, sir.
Transmission to Starfleet complete, sir.
Very good. Time, Mister Chekov?
Penetration of the zone in one minute, seven seconds, sir.
Red Alert. Deflectors full power. Phaser banks ready.
Phasers standing by. Deflectors at full power, sir.
It's not coming from communications, sir.
Spock!
Analysing now, Captain.
Captain, the stars are gone!
Malfunction, Mister Spock?
Negative, Captain. All systems functioning properly.
Then kindly tell me what happened to the stars.
Unknown, Captain.
Kirk to McCoy.
McCoy here.
Things any better down there?
Worse. They're backed up into the corridor.
Have you got anything that will help up here? I don't want anybody folding on the bridge at a critical moment.
On my way. McCoy out.
Kirk to Engineering. Scotty, there was a power loss. How come?
We lost five percent of our energy reserve, sir. Our deflector shields are weakened.
Can you compensate for the loss?
Aye, if we don't lose any more. Don't ask me how it happened.
I am asking how, mister. I want answers. Kirk out.
What's that?
A stimulant.
Bones, how bad is it?
Two thirds of the personnel are affected.
Why? How? Do you have any answers?
No. You know you'll get everything I can tell you. But when there is nothing, what should I say?
Nurse.
This ship is in trouble. We'd better start solving problems faster than we pick up new ones. We seem to be in the middle of a creeping paralysis. Mister Spock, analysis of that last burst of noise before we started losing power.
That sound was turbulence caused by the penetration of a boundary layer, Captain.
What boundary layer?
Unknown.
Boundary layer between what and what?
Between where we were and where we are.
Are you trying to be funny, Mister Spock?
It would never occur to me, Captain.
Do you have any ideas, Spock?
We still have no specifics, but we seem to have entered a zone of energy which is incompatible with our living and mechanical processes. As we draw closer to the source, it grows stronger and we grow weaker.
Recommendations.
I have one. I recommend survival. Let's get out of here.
This is the Captain. We're on a difficult mission, but it's not the first time. Our orders do not say stay alive or retreat.
Our mission is to investigate.
We're sick, and we're getting sicker.
We have no guarantees, but we have a good ship and the best crew in Starfleet. So do your jobs. Carry on. Kirk out.
Sickbay to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here. Go ahead, Bones.
Jim, according to the life indicators, the energy levels
Yes, say it, Bones.
According to the life monitors, we're dying.
We're all dying.
Are you all right?
Yes.
What was that?
I'm sorry, sir. I'm not sure. I was trying to recalibrate, and we went into reverse.
Reverse? But that was a forward lurch. How could that happen in reverse thrust?
I don't know, sir. All I know is that the power levels are down twelve percent and steadily decreasing. I've never experienced anything like it.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Sir, we are accelerating. We are being pulled toward the centre of the zone of darkness.
By what, Spock?
Unknown, Captain. I suggest you order Mister Scott to give us reverse power.
He just gave us reverse power. We lurched forward.
In that case, Captain, I would suggest we apply forward thrust.
Doctor. Life function indicators. They've started a sharp drop again.
Stimulants. I don't know how long we can keep this up.
What do you think, Scotty? Forward thrust?
I don't know, sir. It goes against the rules of logic.
Yes, doesn't it? Well, if it doesn't work, I'll never let Spock live it down. Notch it into forward.
But
Go ahead.
That's doing it, sir. We're slowing down. But we're not stopping. We're still being dragged forward.
Have one of your engineers monitor the instruments. Keep applying thrust against the pull.
Doctor, they seem to be stabilising.
But at a dangerously low level. Well, we're still alive. I suppose that's something.
All I can contribute is the further we travel into this zone of darkness, the weaker our life functions become, and I have no idea why. I'm all right. It's those stimulants. They catch up with you.
Engineering.
As to the power levels are concerned, everything is acting backwards, but the drain is continuing. On the static test, I could only get sixty percent power. We're still being dragged forward.
Spock.
It's logical to assume that something within this zone absorbs all forms of energy whether mechanically or biologically produced. Whatever it is, it would seem to be the same thing which drew all the energy out of an entire solar system and the Intrepid.
The same thing, not the zone itself?
I would say not, Captain. The analysis of the zone indicates it is a negative energy field, however illogical that may sound, but it is not the source of the power drain.
Maybe it's a shield of some kind. Some form of protection for something else.
But what?
We'll find out what it is, but we'd better get out of here ourselves. Scotty, channel all the impulse and warp power into one massive thrust forward. That might snap us out of the zone.
Aye, Captain, but I'll reserve some for the shields in case we don't get out.
I submit, Mister Scott, if we do not get out, the shields would be extraneous. It would only prolong our wait for death by a short period of time.
Use whatever power is necessary to get us out of here, Scotty. Report to your stations, continue your research. Dismissed.
Captain, the Intrepid would have done all these things too, and yet they were destroyed.
Well, they may not have done all of these things. You just pointed out how illogical this situation is.
True. It is also true they never knew what was killing them. Their logic would not have permitted them to believe they were being killed.
Explain.
Vulcan has not been conquered within its collective memory. The memory goes back so far that no Vulcan can conceive of a conqueror. I knew the ship was lost because I sensed it.
What was it you sensed?
The touch of death.
And what do you think they felt?
Astonishment.
That ought to do it. Engineering to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here. What is it, Scotty?
Ready to try it when you are, sir.
Do we have the power to pull it off, Scotty?
I hope so, Captain.
Stand by. All hands, this is the captain. We are slowly being pulled deeper into the zone of darkness by an unknown force. We're going to apply
All available power
Into one giant forward thrust
In the hope that it will yank us out of the zone. Prepare yourselves. All right, Scotty. Let's get on with it.
Scotty!
It's no good, sir. The best we can do is to maintain thrust against the pull and hold our position.
Are we still losing power?
Aye, sir.
How long will the power hold out?
At this rate, plus the drain on all systems, two hours.
Maintain thrust, Scotty. While we're maintaining our distance, Mister Spock, have you ascertained yet what we're maintaining our distance from?
I cannot say what it is, Captain, but I would say it has found us.
Prepare to launch a probe, Mister Chekov.
Aye, sir. Probe ready for launch, sir.
Getting very confused readings, Captain, but this is definitely the source of the energy drain.
Launch probe.
Probe launched, sir.
Probe will impact in seven point three seconds.
Six, five, four, three, two, one.
Are we still in contact with the probe?
Yes, sir. Data being relayed to Mister Spock.
Readings coming in now, Captain. Length, approximately eleven thousand miles. Width varying from two thousand to three thousand miles. Outer layer studded with space debris and waste. Interior consists of protoplasm, varying from a firmer gelatinous layer to a semi-fluid central mass. Condition, living.
Magnification four.
Magnification four, sir.
That is what is drawing us toward it, Captain. The same way it drew the Intrepid to her death.
That is an amoeba.
Yes, I remember my basic biology, Doctor. You mean to tell me that that thing is a giant single-celled animal?
Yes, for lack of a better term. It's a very simple form of life. In fact it's a much simpler form of life than what you're looking at now. But that thing can apparently perform all the functions that qualify it as a living organism. It can reproduce, it can breathe, it can eat, although I don't know what.
Energy itself, perhaps, drained from us. I would speculate that this unknown life form is invading our galaxy like a virus.
The Intrepid died of that particular virus. How is it we survived?
The Intrepid must have come across the organism while it was still low in energy, still hungry. We are not safe, Captain. We merely have a little more time than the Intrepid did.
What about this zone of darkness? Does the organism generate it itself as a form of protection?
It's one of the things we've got to find out. We've got to take a closer look at it.
The closer we get, the faster our energy drains out. We're barely surviving at this distance.
Perhaps we could risk the shuttlecraft. Perhaps with a protective shield
I'm not sending anyone anywhere. Unmanned probes can give us the information we need to destroy this thing, if it can be destroyed.
I must differ with you, Captain. We have sent unmanned probes into it. They have given us some information but they have not told us what we need to know, and we cannot afford the power to take blind shots at it, hoping to kill it.
We could send one man in, pinpoint its vulnerable spots.
DO you know what the odds are in coming back? I can't order a man to do that.
Who said anything about an order, Jim? You've got a volunteer. I've done the preliminary work.
It's a suicide mission.
The thing evidently has reflexes. The unmanned probe we sent in must have stung it when it entered. The lurch we felt was the turbulence of its reaction.
All right, so I'd know enough to go slow when we penetrated its vulnerable spots.
You have a martyr complex, Doctor. I submit that it disqualifies you.
Do you think I intend to pass up the greatest living laboratory since
The Vulcans saw it first and died.
Just because the Vulcans failed
I am more capable.
Gentlemen, I am not taking volunteers.
You don't think you're going?
I'm better qualified as a command pilot than you are.
Which makes you indispensable, Captain. Further, you are not a science specialist.
Jim, that organism contains chemical processes we've never seen before and may never see again. We could learn more in one day
We don't have one day, Doctor. We have precisely one hour and thirty five minutes of power left.
Jim
Captain, I
Gentlemen, I'll decide.
Captain's personal log, stardate 4309.2. We have established that the thing which destroyed the USS Intrepid and the Gamma Seven=A system is an incredibly huge but simple cellular being whose energies are totally destructive to all known life. Both Mister Spock and Doctor McCoy have volunteered to go in a specially equipped shuttlecraft to penetrate the cell, find a way to destroy it, and free the ship. Doctor McCoy has the medical-biological knowledge. Mister Spock is better suited physically and emotionally to stand the stress. Both are right, both are capable, and which of my friends do I condemn to death? This is the captain. Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy, report to my quarters immediately. Kirk out.
Engineering to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
You asked me to keep you informed on the power drain. All levels are down fifty percent now
And still draining. We can maintain thrust for another hour and fifteen minutes.
Very well. Prepare the shuttlecraft for launching.
Sir?
Doctor McCoy will tell you what special equipment to put in. Kirk out. I'm sorry, Mister Spock.
Right. I'll get a few things I need, Jim.
Not you, Bones. I'm sorry, Mister Spock. You're best qualified to go.
Do not suffer so, Doctor. This is not the first time superior capability has proven more valuable than professional credentials.
Nothing has been proven yet, Spock. The DNA code analyser will give you the fundamental structure of the thing. You'll need readings on three light wavelengths from the enzyme recorder.
I am familiar with the equipment, Doctor. We're wasting time. The shuttlecraft is ready.
You're determined not to let me share in this, aren't you?
This is not a competition, Doctor. Whether you understand it or not, grant me my own kind of dignity.
Vulcan dignity? How can I grant you what I don't understand?
Then employ one of your own superstitions. Wish me luck.
Good luck, Spock.
All systems clear for shuttlecraft launch. sir.
Launch shuttlecraft.
Shuttlecraft away, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, channel automatic telemetry directly to the computers.
Aye, aye, sir.
Shuttlecraft to Enterprise.
Come in, Spock.
Power drain is enormous and growing worse.
Chekov.
Diverting all secondary power to the shields. (McCoy enters) I'll continue communications as long as there is power to transmit.
Captain, h e won't have enough power to get back out if he diverts it to his shields.
Spock.
I heard, Captain.
We discussed that possibility earlier. But you will need this information.
When do you estimate penetration?
Slowing now. Contact in eighteen point three seconds. Brace yourselves. The area of penetration will no doubt be sensitive. Contact
In six seconds.
Report, Mister Spock. Spock, report.
I am undamaged, Captain. Relay to Mister Scott I had three percent power reserve before the shields stabilised.
There was nothing to spare. I shall continue my tests. Oh, and Doctor McCoy. You would have not survived it.
You want to bet?
I am moving slowly now, establishing course toward what appears to be the nucleus.
Sir, Mister Spock has reduced life-support systems to bare minimum.
Spock, save your power for the shields.
Calculations indicate the shields will last only forty seven minutes.
However, I am able to identify the chromosome structure.
Changes indicate the organism has stored sufficient energy for reproductive process to commence.
You mean there'll be two of those things?
I'm having difficulty maintaining ship control.
Spock, do you read me? Spock, do you read me?
I'm losing voice contact I will transmit internal co-ordinates of chromosome bodies.
Spock, come in. Come in.
Contact lost, sir.
He's alive! He's kicked it in the side to let us know.
Captain, I'm getting telemetry.
Mister Chekov, telemetry analysis as it comes in.
According to Spock's telemetry information, there are over forty chromosomes in the nucleus that are ready to come together, ready to reproduce.
If the energy of that organism only doubles, we're dead, and everything within a light year will be defenceless.
Well, all I know is, that soon there'll be two, four, eight, and more. The entire anti-life matter that that thing puts out could someday encompass the entire galaxy.
Spock understood when he transmitted the co-ordinates of the chromosomes. We must destroy that organism.
Captain, the pull from that organism is increasing, and the power drain from our shields is getting critical.
How much time do we have?
No more than an hour now, sir.
Put all secondary systems on standby. Shield power has unconditional priority.
Aye, sir.
Captain, I'm receiving a message from Mister Spock on a low-energy channel. It's faint, but it is readable.
Put it on, Lieutenant.
On audio, sir.
This is Spock.
I am slowly losing life support and minimal shield energies. According to my calculations
(Barely audible over static) The nervous energy of the organism is maximal just within its outer protective membrane. Relatively insensitive to interior irritation. I believe sufficient charge of (inaudible) could destroy the organism. Tell Doctor McCoy he should have wished me luck.
How do you feel?
What's on your mind?
Spock. Is it me, Jim? Am I so sentimental that I just have to keep believing that he's still alive in that mass of protoplasm?
He knew the odds when he went out there, just as you did when you volunteered to go. What is that thing out there, Bones? It's not intelligent. Not yet.
It's a disease, like a virus invading the body of our galaxy.
Yes, it is, isn't it? How many cells does the human body have?
Millions.
This thing, this cell, this virus. It's eleven thousand miles long, and it's one cell. When it grows into millions, we'll be the virus invading its body.
Now, isn't that a thought? Here we are, antibodies of our own galaxy, attacking an invading germ. It would be ironic indeed if that were our sole destiny, wouldn't it?
Antibodies. Antibodies. (goes to desk monitor) Bridge.
Scott here, sir.
Scotty, how much power do we have left?
We're down to forty three percent, sir. We're slipping a bit against the pull that beastie's putting on us.
We can't last more than forty five minutes at this rate of decline. Less, if I have to apply more thrust.
What would happen if you diverted all remaining power to the shields, except for impulse power, keep that in reserve?
Cut the engine thrust? We'd be sucked into that thing like being caught in a wind tunnel, sir.
Exactly. Prepare to divert power on my signal. Kirk out.
Have you got something to say?
Technically, no. Medically, yes. Between the stimulants and the pressure, I would suggest you try to stay off your feet for a few minutes.
I don't have a few minutes, Bones. Maybe none of us do. Let's go.
All hands, this is the captain. We're going to enter the body of the organism rather abruptly, I would think. Damage control parties stand by. All decks secure for collision. Kirk out.
Ready, Scotty.
Switching power to shields. Impulse in reserve. Cutting thrust to zero, now!
Impact five seconds.
We're through, sir.
I believe everybody is aware of that, Mister Chekov.
Damage control parties report minimal damage, sir. Repairs are being initiated.
Very good, Lieutenant.
Captain, we've only twenty six percent power reserves after entry.
Do we have impulse power, Scotty?
I saved all I could, sir, but I don't know whether we have enough to get back out again. Or time either.
We are committed.
Aye, we are, but we're committed to what? We have no power for the phasers.
We couldn't use it. We'd cook ourselves along with that mess of protoplasm out there
That thing would probably like phasers. It eats power.
Then what the devil, begging your pardon sir, are we doing?
Mister Spock was trying to tell us what to do when we lost voice contact.
We can't use the power to destroy it.
Anti-power.
What?
This thing has a negative energy charge. Everything seems to work in reverse. We'll use anti-matter.
Aye, it couldn't swallow that.
Mister Chekov, prepare a probe. Scotty, we'll need a magnetic bottle for the charge. How soon?
It's on its way, sir.
Mister Chekov, we'll use a timing detonator for the probe. Work out a setting.
Aye, sir.
Helmsman, when do you estimate arrival at nucleus?
Seven minutes, sir.
How close are you going to it?
Point blank range. We'll implant it then back away.
Why? The probe has a range of
With the eddies and currents in that protoplasm, the probe could drift thousands of kilometres. We must be exactly on target, because we won't have a second chance. Bones, time for another stimulant.
How long do you think you can keep taking that stuff? It'll blow you apart.
Keep me together for another seven minutes. That's all I need.
Personal log, Commander Spock, USS Enterprise. I have noted the passage of the Enterprise on its way to whatever awaits it. If this record should survive me, I wish it known that I bequeath my highest commendation and testimonial to the captain, officers, and crew of the Enterprise. The finest starship in the fleet.
(also making a log entry) We have arrived at the chromosome body in the nucleus of the organism. If we should fail in our attempt to destroy it, or be unable to free ourselves, I wish to record my recommendations for the following personnel, that they receive special citation. Lieutenant Commander Leonard McCoy, Lieutenant Commander Montgomery Scott, officers Chekov, Kyle, Uhura, and my highest commendation for Commander Spock, Science Officer, who gave his life in the performance of his duty.
Target co-ordinates programmed, sir. Probe ready for launch.
Mister Scott, how much time do we have left at one hundred percent impulse power?
Six, maybe seven minutes, sir.
Mister Kyle, programme fuse for seven minute delay. All non-essential systems on standby. Communications, scanning, conserve every bit of power. We must make it through the membrane before that thing explodes. Make it work, Scotty.
Aye, sir.
Programming complete. Ready for launch.
Launch probe at zero acceleration. Forward thrust off, one tenth of a second.
Forward thrust off, sir.
Probe launched, sir.
Despite what Spock said, it's still plenty sensitive.
Probe confirmed. It is lodged in the nucleus, near the chromosome bodies.
Mister Kyle, back us out the way we came in. Mister Chekov, a nice, straight line. Don't waste any time.
Backing out, sir.
Estimate we'll be out in six point thirty seven minutes.
Very good.
Captain, metallic substance outside the ship.
Spock?
Lieutenant, get me Spock's voice channel. Highest possible gain.
Go ahead, sir.
Spock, do you read me? Do you read me, Spock, do you read me? Come in, Spock. Spock! Scotty, get a tractor beam.
Captain, we don't have enough time to do it. We only have a fifty three second escape margin.
I'm well aware of that, Mister Scott. Get two tractor beams on that shuttlecraft.
Aye, sir. Tractor beams on.
Captain, I recommend you abandon the attempt.
Do not risk the ship further on my behalf.
Shut up, Spock! We're rescuing you.
Why, thank you, Captain McCoy.
Almost out. We're approaching the membrane, sir.
Time until explosion?
Fifty seven seconds, sir.
Maintaining tractor beams on shuttlecraft, Mister Scott?
Aye, sir. I can't guarantee it'll hold when the warhead explodes. The power levels are (looks at readout) The power levels are dead, sir.
You may have just written our epitaph, Mister Scott.
Activate main viewing screen. (they see stars.) Mister Chekov, report.
The organism is destroyed, sir. The explosion must have ruptured the membrane and thrown us clear.
Power's coming back, sir.
Shuttlecraft?
I don't know how, sir, but it's still with us.
Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Shuttlecraft to Enterprise. Request permission to come aboard.
Spock, you're alive!
Obviously, Captain. And I have some fascinating data on the organism.
Don't be so smart, Spock. You botched the acetylcholine test.
Later, later, later. Bring the shuttlecraft aboard, Mister Scott.
Aye, sir.
Prepare to receive shuttlecraft. Received shuttlecraft. Hangar doors closed. Hangar deck pressurising.
Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Starbase Six. Ahead warp factor five. I'm still looking forward to a nice period of rest and relaxation on some lovely (gazes at yeoman) planet.
A Private Little War
Yes, Jim.
How much longer, McCoy?
Oh, about another thirty minutes. I've come across some most interesting organic compounds. Hey, Starfleet was right.
These roots and soil cultures can be a medical treasure house. Any problems there?
No sign of the inhabitants so far. Kirk out.
Large prints. The ape-like carnivore in the reports?
Yes, the mugato. No problem, though. Those prints are several days old. They seldom stay in one place.
Aside from that, you say it's a Garden of Eden?
Or so it seemed to the brash young Lieutenant Kirk on his first planet survey.
Class M in all respects. Quite Earth-like.
Except these people stayed in their Garden of Eden. Bows and arrows for hunting, but absolutely no fighting among themselves. Remarkably peaceful and tranquil.
Ho! Take cover here!
Bows and arrows, Captain?
Villagers with flintlocks? That's impossible. They hadn't progressed nearly that far.
Captain, look.
One of those men walking into ambush is Tyree. The friend I lived with here. (He draws his phaser.)
Captain, use of our phasers is expressly forbidden.
Villagers!
Enterprise, alert! Stand by to beam up landing party.
Spock? Your phaser. (it is missing, so Kirk prepares to use his to defend his friend.)
No, Captain. I can travel.
Beam us up, quickly.
Now, Scotty. Have medics stand by.
What happened, Captain?
Lead projectile. Primitive firearm.
Pressure packet. Lucky his heart's where his liver should be, or he'd be dead now.
Coranalin.
Bones, can you save him?
All decks, Red Alert! Battle stations, battle stations! Go to Red Alert!
Kirk here.
Uhura, sir. We have a Klingon vessel on our screen.
On my way. Scotty. Bones?
I don't know yet, Jim.
Captain, we're holding the planet between us and the Klingons. I don't think they've spotted us.
Make that definite, sir. They're sending a routine message to their home base with no mention of us.
Good. Go to Yellow Alert.
Yellow Alert. All stations go to Yellow Alert.
Do you think you can keep us out of their sight, Chekov?
I can try, Captain.
Message to Starbase, sir?
No point in giving ourselves away, Lieutenant. Not until we find out what's going on.
We can hide for a while, sir, but we may have to go out of orbit to keep it up for long.
Kirk to Sickbay.
McCoy here. I'll call you soon as I know anything. Sickbay out.
So, they've broken the treaty.
Not necessarily, Captain. They have as much right to scientific missions here as we have.
Research is not the Klingon way.
True, but since this is a hands-off planet, how are you going to prove they're doing otherwise?
When I left there thirteen years ago, those villagers had barely learned to forge iron. Spock was shot with a flintlock. How many centuries between those two developments?
On Earth, about twelve, sir.
On the other hand, a flintlock would be the first firearm the inhabitants would normally develop.
Yes, I'm aware of that, Mister Scott. 
And, sir, the fact Earth took twelve centuries doesn't mean they had to.
We've seen different development at rates on different planets.
And were the Klingons behind it, why didn't they give them breechloaders?
Or machine guns?
Or old-style hand lasers?
I did not invite a debate. I'm sorry. I'm worried about Spock and concerned about what's happened to something I once knew down there. You have the conn, Scotty. I'll be in Sickbay.
Agreed. Sterilite off.
Yes, sir.
He'll live or die now, Jim. I don't know which. Doctor M'Benga interned on a Vulcan ward. He couldn't be in better hands.
Then you and I are transporting down.
I can't leave Spock at this time.
You just indicated you could. There are Klingons here. If their mission is a legitimate research interest in the planet's organic potential, then you're the one man who can tell me.
And if that's not it?
Then I need help. Advice I can trust as much as Spock's.
I appreciate the compliment, Jim, but
Bones, I'm as worried about Spock as you are, but if the Klingons are breaking the treaty it could be interstellar war. Kirk to Bridge.
Bridge, Scott here.
McCoy and I are transporting back down. Inform ship's stores that we'll need native costumes.
Captain, we may have to break out of orbit any minute to keep out of their sight. We'd be out of communicator range with you.
I understand. We'll arrange a rendezvous schedule. Kirk out.
Perfect. Tyree's camp's a quarter of a mile away.
Want to think about it again, Jim? Starfleet's orders about this planet state no interference with
No interference with normal social development. I'm not only aware of it, it was my survey thirteen years ago that recommended it.
I read it. Inhabitants superior in many ways to humans. Left alone, they undoubtedly someday will develop a remarkably advanced and peaceful culture.
Indeed. And I intend to see that they have that chance. You coming with me?
Do I have a choice?
(shaking) Contact ship. Took full poison. Fangs.
Enterprise, McCoy. Emergency. Come in. Enterprise, come in. McCoy! Emergency!
They left. Out of orbit.
(giving an injection) Jim, there is no antitoxin for this poison. I can only keep you alive a few hours with this.
Tyree. Some of his men. Cure.
Are you hill people? Do you know a hunter named Tyree? A mugato attacked him. He's James Kirk. He's a friend of Tyree's. Blast it! Do something! He's dying!
Take him to the cave. I bring Tyree.
Medical log, stardate 4211.8. Kirk is right about the people here. Despite their fear and our strangeness, they're compassionate and gentle. I've learned the hunter Tyree is now their leader. He is expected to return shortly with his wife, who they say knows how to cure this poison. My problem. The captain is in deep shock. I must keep him warm and alive until then.
You and your Garden of Eden.
We must obtain the same firesticks, husband. You could be killing them instead. We could take their houses, their goods.
Nona, enough. In time the villagers will return to their ways of friendship.
In time? They kill your people! I am a Kahn-ut-tu woman. In all this land, how many are there? Men seek us because through us they become great leaders.
I took you because you cast a spell upon me.
And I have spells that help me keep you. Remember this leaf? The night we camped by the water?
The night of madness.
Oh, Tyree, did you really hate that madness?
No, Nona. No! It brought up evil beasts from my soul.
Only one lovely beast, Tyree, my huge, angry man.
Forgive me. 
What is it?
There are strangers in our camp. One has taken the mugato bite. He dies.
Strangers?
It is said the dying one is a friend of Tyree, from long ago.
That one. Bring him when his head clears.
The stranger, where is he?
Nona, where's Kirk? The cave?
Tyree, you wish me to save him?
You must. He is the one I told you of. The friend of my younger days.
My remedies require I know what kind of man he is. All that is known of him.
I gave him my promise of silence. He was made my brother.
And I am your wife, his sister. I promise silence also.
Nona
Quickly! Or he dies.
You mean he's conscious?
A good nurse always treats her patients that way. It proves she's interested.
I am Tyree.
And I'm Tyree's woman.
It is Kirk. She will cure him.
What's that?
A mahko root.
A plant? It moves.
For those who know where to find it, how to use it, how to pick it.
Take this of my soul. This of my soul. Thine own. Into thine. Deeply. Together. Your pain is mine. All mine. Your soul and mine, together! Return. It is past. Return. Return!
Bones. I had the strangest dream.
How do you feel, Jim?
Tired. Very tired. You did a fine job, Bones. I think I'll sleep.
I want to thank you for saving his life. (Nona's hand is healed too) I would like to learn more about this.
Our blood has passed through the mahko root together. Our souls have been together. He is mine now.
She must sleep also.
He is hers?
When a man and woman are joined in this manner, he can refuse her no wish. But it is only legend.
Jim.
Bones. What are you doing here? (their voices wake Tyree) Tyree. My old friend.
Yes, James! James, it's good to see you.
What am I doing here? A mugato bite! I remember. I told him to take me to Tyree's camp. I knew you'd find a kahn-ut-tu to cure me. The kahn-ut-tu is the local witch people here. They've studied (Nona gets up and stands in front of him) They've studied the roots and the herbs.
I am a kahn-ut-tu, Captain. I cured you.
My wife, Nona.
Yes, of course. I should've guessed. Congratulations. Tyree, we must talk now. The villagers, their new weapons. I want to hear all about that. We must make plans.
Good. It is past time to plan.
Much has happened since you left, James. Come, we'll speak of it.
And of things to be done.
Come. (the men leave, but he stops Nona from following.) We will speak of it.
The readings are beginning to fluctuate.
Yes, Doctor.
Do whatever he says?
The firesticks first appeared nearly a year ago. Since that time, many of my people have died.
You say they make the firesticks themselves? How can you be sure?
I've looked into their village. I have seen it being done.
Have you seen any strangers among the villagers?
Strangers? No.
Can you take us to their village while it's still dark?
Yes, but the mugatos travel at night also. You killed one. Its mate will not be far.
(showing his phaser) You've seen how these work.
I've seen them also, and I know you have many ways to make your friend Tyree a man of great importance.
Many ways? What else does she know about us?
Tyree has told me much of you. Do not blame him. It was the price for saving your life.
We're simply strangers from
From one of the lights in the sky, and you have ways as far above firesticks as the sky above our world.
You will not speak of this to others.
I will not if I am made to understand. Teach me. There's an old custom among my people. When a woman saves a man's life, he is grateful.
I am grateful.
A splendid custom if not carried to extremes.
We once were as you are, Spears, arrows. There came a time when our weapons grew faster than our wisdom, and we almost destroyed ourselves. We learned from this to make a rule during all our travels, Never to cause the same to happen to other worlds. Just as a man must grow in his own way and in his own time.
Some men never grow.
Perhaps not as fast or in the way another thinks he should. But we're wise enough to know that we are wise enough not to interfere with the way of a man or another world.
You must let the villagers destroy us? You will not help your friend and brother kill them instead?
No! I said I will not kill!
We must fight or die! Is dying better? You would let him die when you have weapons to make him powerful and safe? Then he has the wrong friends. And I have the wrong husband. (leaves)
You will help in ways she does not understand. I have faith in our friendship, James. Come, before we lose the darkness. (leaves)
What's bothering you, Jim? If we find the Klingons have helped the villagers, there's certainly something we can do.
That's what's bothering me. The something we may have to do.
The guard. We must wait.
Tyree, supposing you had to fight? What then?
Jim, this man believes in the same thing we believe in. That killing is stupid and useless.
Tyree?
Now. Come.
The gun. Ammunition. Doctor.
You are late, my friend Apella.
A quarrel by my people. A division of some skins and a hill woman taken this morning. It's hard to divide one woman.
Give her to the man who killed the most of her people. The others will see the profit in bravery. I'll make a Klingon of you yet.
What?
A way to shoot further and straighter.
Jim. Coal for forge, sulphur for gun powder.
Let's take a look inside.
Well, here's your forge. People's exhibit number one. A chrome steel drill point.
Right. It's a pity we can't include a live Klingon. That'd just about wrap it
Is it difficult to cut grooves into the barrels?
It's quite simple. I'll show you.
I thought my people would grow tired of killing. But you were right. They see that it is easier than trading and it has pleasures. I feel it myself. Like the hunt, but with richer rewards.
You will be rich one day, Apella, beyond your dreams. The leader of a whole world. A governor in the Klingon Empire.
Bones!
Guards! Intruders!
(to Tyree) Move! Fast!
Nurse.
Yes?
Hit me. The pain will help me to consciousness. Hit me.
Hit you? No! I can't
Blast you, strike me! If I don't regain consciousness soon, it may be too late. Hit me. (she slaps his face) Harder!
Again. Continue. The pain will help me to consciousness.
(running in and dragging her away) What are you doing, woman?
Leave me alone!
Have you gone daft?
Mister Spock needs me! Let go!
That will be quite enough. Thank you, doctor. 
What's this all about?
She was doing as I requested, Mister Scott. A Vulcan form of self-healing.
Here, let me help you, Mister Spock.
Thank you, nurse. I'm quite fully recovered.
Yes, I see you are.
Men, this is the pan. This is the hammer. The hammer striking the pan causes a spark, ignites the powder, and fires the flintlock. Now aim it as I showed you. Hold your breath and squeeze the trigger gently. (Tyree shoots the clay pot target) Well done. Very, very, very good.
Jim, I want to talk to you.
Not here, Bones. In the cave. Yutan, your turn.
Do I have to say it? It's not bad enough there's one serpent in Eden teaching one side about gun powder. You want to make sure they all know about it!
Exactly. Each side receives the same knowledge and the same type of firearm.
Have you gone out of your mind? Yes, maybe you have. Tyree's wife, she said there was something in that root. She said now you can refuse her nothing.
Superstition.
Is it a coincidence this is exactly what she wants?
Is it? She wants superior weapons. That's the one thing neither side can have. Bones. Bones, the normal development of this planet was the status quo between the hill people and the villagers. The Klingons changed that with the flintlocks. If this planet is to develop the way it should, we must equalize both sides again.
Jim, that means you're condemning this whole planet to a war that may never end. It could go on for year after year, massacre after massacre.
All right, Doctor! All right. Say I'm wrong. Say I'm drugged. Say the woman drugged me. What is your sober, sensible solution to all this?
I don't have a solution. But furnishing them firearms is certainly not the answer.
Bones, do you remember the twentieth century brush wars on the Asian continent? Two giant powers involved, much like the Klingons and ourselves. Neither side felt could pull out.
Yes, I remember. It went on bloody year after bloody year.
What would you have suggested, that one side arm its friends with an overpowering weapon? Mankind would never have lived to travel space if they had. No. The only solution is what happened back then. Balance of power.
And if the Klingons give their side even more?
Then we arm our side with exactly that much more. A balance of power. The trickiest, most difficult, dirtiest game of them all, but the only one that preserves both sides.
And what about your friend Tyree? Will he understand this balance of power?
No. Probably not. But I'm going to have to try and make him understand. I never had a more difficult task.
Well, Jim, here's another morsel of agony for you. Since Tyree won't fight, he will be one of the first to die.
Well, war isn't a good life, but it's life. His wife is the only way to reach him. If I tell her we're going to supply guns, maybe she'll convince him.
Position, Mister Scott?
Entering distant orbit, sir. Approaching rendezvous time.
The Klingons?
They haven't spotted us yet, sir. Looks like they're beaming someone aboard.
Stand by to signal the captain.
Aye, sir.
You are here because I wished you here.
Oh? I thought it was my idea.
Yes. They always believe they come of free will. Tyree thought the same when I cast my first spell on him.
Nona
Can you smell this fragrance? Some find it pleasing.
I'd like to talk to you.
Again. Some find it soothing. Yes.
I would like
Happy. Yes. You feel good.
I feel dizzy. Yes, you are lovely. You're beautiful.
Kiss me.
Where's Captain Kirk? Tyree, the firestick. Where is it?
There! I left it there.
That's a fine thing to leave lying around. Show us where it is.
I do not want it.
Jim? Jim. Who hit you?
Nona.
I bring you victory for Apella!
Take me to him. He will have the strength to use this new weapon.
Touch me again, and this small box will kill you.
No, no. I'm all right. My phaser. She took it.
This weapon I bring you is far greater than your firesticks.
Nona!
She's dead.
I want more of these, Kirk. Many more! Yutan, two of those who killed my wife have escaped. Track them down. I will kill them.
Here.
Tomorrow in the palm of her hands.
Well, you got what you wanted.
Not what I wanted, Bones. What had to be. (McCoy hands him a communicator from his bag) Kirk here.
Spock, are you alive?
An illogical question, Doctor, since obviously you are hearing my voice.
Well, I don't know why I was worried. You can't kill a computer.
Spock, ask Scotty how long it would take him to reproduce a hundred flintlocks.
(losing his grin) I didn't get that exactly, Captain. A hundred what?
A hundred serpents. Serpents for the Garden of Eden. We're very tired, Mister Spock. Beam us up home.
Return To Tomorrow
The reading's growing stronger, Captain. Coming from a star system directly ahead.
It's not a signal, sir. It does not seem to even exist, and yet it's affecting all my channels.
Well?
Someone or something is attempting to attract our attention.
Someone or something has succeeded. Our distress signal relays have been activated. We've been given a direction to follow, but how? What's causing it?
I do not know. Not even a Vulcan can know the unknown, Captain. We are hundreds of light years past where any Earth ship has ever explored.
Planet dead ahead, Captain. Becoming visual.
Class M planet, Captain.
Close to Earth conditions.
With two very important exceptions. It's much older than Earth, and about a half million years ago, its atmosphere was totally ripped away by some sort of cataclysm. The planet has evidently been dead since then. Sensors detect no life of any kind.
All of your questions will be answered in time, Captain Kirk.
No, sir.
I am Sargon. It is the energy of my thoughts which has touched your instruments and directed you here. Now with this closer distance I can speak to you at last.
Who are you, Sargon?
Please assume a standard orbit about our planet, Captain.
Is that a request or demand?
The choice is yours. I read what is in your mind. Words are unnecessary.
The planet is dead. There's no possibility of life there as we understand life.
And I am as dead as my planet. Does that frighten you, James Kirk? For if it does, if you let what is left of me perish, then all of you, my children, all of mankind must perish, too.
(dictating log) Since exploration and contact with alien intelligences is our primary mission, I've decided to risk the potential dangers and resume contact. Log entry out. How long before Starfleet receives that?
Over three weeks at this distance, sir.
Captain.
Got something?
Sensors registering some form of energy deep inside the planet.
Your probes have touched me, Mister Spock.
Reading energy only, Captain. No life forms.
I have locked your transporter device on my co-ordinates. Please come to us. Rescue us from oblivion.
Coming from deep under the planet's surface, Captain. Under at least one hundred miles of solid rock.
I will make it possible for your transporter to beam you that deep beneath the surface. Have no fear.
Reading a chamber now. Oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere, suitable for human life support.
Lieutenant Uhura, have Doctor McCoy report to the transporter room in ten minutes with standard landing party equipment.
Yes, sir.
Spock.
Captain, I do wish to inspect whatever this is that lived that long ago.
And I would like to have my science officer with me on something as unusual as this, but it is full of unknowns and we can't risk both of us being off the ship.
All power gone, sir.
On the other hand, perhaps this Sargon would like you to come with us.
Fascinating.
All normal. No damage at all.
I see. Will you transport down with us, Mister Spock?
Evidently, Captain.
Mister Sulu, you have the conn.
Jim, why no briefing on this? I'd at least like to know what we're getting into.
Easy, Bones. As long as you know there's something down there, you know as much as we do. The rest is only guesses.
I don't like it, sir. The transporter co-ordinates preset by an alien of some sort. You could materialise inside solid rock.
Inside solid rock?
Unlikely. These co-ordinates correspond with the location of the subterranean chamber.
I have a feeling that they or it could destroy us just standing here if they or it wanted to.
They or it?
Who are you?
Doctor Ann Mulhall, Astro-biology. Well, I was ordered to report here for landing party duty.
By whom?
Strange, I'm not sure. Well, I'm not a liar, Captain. I did receive an order to report here for duty.
I'm sure she did, Captain, Just as you received an order to bring me along.
Oh, yes.
Let's get back to this solid rock business. Just how much rock are we going to go through?
Approximately one hundred twelve point three seven miles, Doctor.
Miles? Are you joking?
No, we're not. Let's go.
Please stand ready. I will operate your controls.
Doctor, if you prefer to stay behind?
No. No, if I'd be useful, as long as you're going down, I might as well take a medical look at whatever this is.
Captain, the security guards.
Kirk here.
Can you read me, Captain?
Yes, Scotty, and I shouldn't be able to this deep inside the planet, but perhaps this has been arranged for us, too. Is the security guard up there?
They're fine. They Just didn't dematerialise.
I don't like it, sir.
No problem yet. Maintain alert. Kirk out.
Atmosphere report, Captain. A fraction richer in oxygen than usual for us, but otherwise normal.
This vault was constructed about a half a million years ago. About the same time the planet surface was destroyed, if our sensor readings are accurate.
Composition of walls?
They're an alloy or substance completely unknown to me. Much stronger and harder than anything I've measured before.
All readings are off the scale, Captain.
The air seems fresh. It must be re-circulated somehow.
Is that for us, or does it need fresh air?
(the glowing sphere) Welcome. I am Sargon.
Sargon, would it harm you if I
You may use your tricorder, Mister Spock. Your readings will show energy but no substance. Sealed in this receptacle is the essence of my mind.
Pure energy. Matter without form.
Impossible.
But you once had a body of some type?
A body much as yours, my children, although our minds were infinitely greater.
That's twice you've referred to us as my children.
Because it is possible you are our descendants, Captain Kirk. Six thousand centuries ago, our vessels were colonising this galaxy, just as your own starships have now begun to explore that vastness. As you now leave your own seed on distant planets, so we left our seed behind us. Perhaps your own legends of an Adam and an Eve were two of our travellers.
Our beliefs and our studies indicate that life on our planet, Earth, evolved independently.
That would tend, however, to explain certain elements of Vulcan prehistory.
In either case, I do not know. It was so long ago, and the records of our travels were lost in the cataclysm which we loosened upon ourselves.
A war?
A struggle for such goals and the unleashing of such power that you could not comprehend.
Then perhaps your intelligence wasn't so great, Sargon. We faced a similar crisis in our early nuclear age. We found the wisdom not to destroy ourselves.
And we survived our primitive nuclear era, my son. But there comes to all races an ultimate crisis which you have yet to face.
I don't understand.
One day our minds became so powerful, we dared think of ourselves as gods.
You said you wanted our help. What is it you wish?
Just a moment, Doctor.
I am Sargon.
Where's our captain? Where's Jim Kirk?
He is unharmed. I have taken his body to demonstrate
(drawing his phaser) I won't go along with this. Back to where you were, Sargon, or whatever you are.
And if he refuses, Doctor, what do you propose to do with your phaser? That is still Jim's body.
Lungs filled with air again. To see again. Heart pumping, arteries surging with blood again. A half a million years. To be again. Your captain has an excellent body, Doctor McCoy. I compliment you both on the condition in which you maintained it.
What are your plans for it? Can you exchange places again when you wish?
Have no fear. Your captain is quite unharmed, although his mind generates insufficient energy for him to speak from there as I do.
Doctor?
Yes, I have the same readings.
Are you aware of what's happening to his body? Heart action doubled, temperature a hundred and four degrees?
He'll die if you don't leave his body. Soon!
What is it you want of us?
In the next room, there are other receptacles. The other two of us that survived. You, Doctor Ann Mulhall, and you, Mister Spock, we require your bodies also. We must have Captain Kirk and you so that we may live again.
Even for us, a half million years is almost too long to wait. Two others still survive. Henoch and Thalassa. Thalassa, my Thalassa. I am pleased you survived with me. Forgive me. It has been so very long.
When the struggle came which devastated your planet
Only the best minds were chosen to survive. Thalassa, my wife, as you may have guessed. Henoch, from the other side. Realising our mistake, we attempted to perpetuate both sides. We built this chamber here in order to preserve our essence in this fashion.
Fascinating.
We knew the seed that we had planted on other planets would take root, that one day you would build vessels as we did, and one day you would come here.
So you could steal our bodies from us?
To steal? To take them from you? No, no, my children, you misunderstand. We mean only that you should lend us your bodies for a short time.
And destroy them, just as you're burning that one up now. Heartbeat's two hundred and sixty two, Spock. Entire metabolic rate correspondingly high.
I will return your captain to you before the body limit has been reached.
Our bodies, Sargon, for what purpose?
To build. To build humanoid robots. We must borrow your bodies long enough to have the use of your hands, your fingers.
Then you intend to construct mechanical bodies, move your minds into them, and then return our bodies to us.
We have engineers, technicians. Why can't they build your robots for you?
No. Our methods, our skills are far beyond your abilities. It is time.
Is it you, Jim? (a nod) Good, his metabolic rate is back to normal.
Captain, do you know what happened? Do you remember any part of it?
Yes. Sargon borrowed my body. I was floating in time and space.
He doesn't appear to be harmed. Physically, anyway.
Spock, I remember. When Sargon and I exchanged, as we passed each other, for an instant we were one. I know him now. I know what he is and what he wants, and I don't fear him.
That's the most ridiculous statement I've ever heard. An alien practically hijacks your body and then corks you into a bottle and
I'm afraid that I must agree with Doctor McCoy. You could be suffering from a form of false euphoria.
Sargon.
I understand, my son. Go to your vessel. All who are involved must agree to this. After all these centuries, we can wait a few more hours.
And what if we should decide against you?
Then you may go as freely as you came.
You're going to what? Are they all right in the head, Doctor?
No comment.
A simple transference. Their minds and ours.
Quite simple. Happens every day.
Scotty, I need your approval, too. Since you'll work with them, furnishing them all they need to make the android robots.
It all seems rather indecent to me.
I'm not so certain of that, Doctor. It is scientifically fascinating.
Once inside their mechanical bodies, engineer, they can leave this planet, travel back with us. With their knowledge, mankind could leap ahead ten thousand years.
Bones, they'll show us medical advances, miracles you never dreamed possible. Scotty, engineering advances. Vessels this size with engines the size of walnuts.
Ach! You're joking.
No, he's not.
They're giants, and we're insects beside them. They could destroy us without meaning to. And all he wants is the body of our captain and our second in command, too. Coincidence?
They selected us as the most compatible bodies.
What's your attitude on that, Doctor?
Well, if we all agree, I'm willing to host Thalassa's mind. I'm a scientist. The opportunity is an extraordinary one for experimentation, observation.
A starship engine the size of a walnut? That's impossible. But I don't suppose there'd be any harm in looking over diagrams on it.
Bones? You could stop all this by saying no. That's why I called you all here together. We'll all be deeply involved. It must be unanimous.
Then I'll still want one question answered to my satisfaction. Why? Not a list of possible miracles, but a simple basic understandable why that overrides all danger. And let's not kid ourselves that there is no potential danger in this.
They used to say if man could fly, he'd have wings. But he did fly. He discovered he had to. Do you wish that the first Apollo mission hadn't reached the moon, or that we hadn't gone on to Mars and then to the nearest star? That's like saying you wish that you still operated with scalpels and sewed your patients up with catgut like your great-great-great-great-grandfather used to. I'm in command. I could order this. But I'm not because, Doctor McCoy is right in pointing out the enormous danger potential in any contact with life and intelligence as fantastically advanced as this. But I must point out that the possibilities, the potential for knowledge and advancement is equally great. Risk. Risk is our business. That's what the starship is all about. That's why we're aboard her. You may dissent without prejudice. Do I hear a negative vote? (silence around the table) Engineer, stand by to beam aboard three receptacles.
The extreme power of the alien mind will drive the heart action dangerously high, and The body functions will race many times their normal metabolism, so we're going to have to monitor this very carefully.
Yes, sir.
Well, I guess we're as ready as we'll ever be, Jim.
Ready, Sargon.
(with echoy Sargon voice) The transference is complete.
Metabolic rate is double and rising, Doctor.
(with a grin and echoy voice) Hello. Oh, you are a lovely female. A pleasant sight to wake up to after half a million years.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
(echoy) I'd forgotten what it felt like even to breathe again. Sargon?
Here. In this body.
I am not displeased, my husband. Your body is not unlike that which was your own.
And I too am pleased, beloved.
After so long. So very long.
Kiss.
This is an excellent body, Doctor. I seem to have received the best of the three. Strength, hearing, eyesight, all far above your human norms. I'm surprised the Vulcans never conquered your race.
Vulcans worship peace above all, Henoch.
Yes, of course, Just as we do, Doctor.
Nurse!
Doctor?
Henoch, you'd better get back to bed too.
It will be unnecessary, Doctor. This Vulcan body is accustomed to the higher metabolism.
Sargon, it won't work. You've got to get out before you kill them.
We will vacate at once until you can administer a metabolic reduction injection.
A what?
I'll prepare the formula, Sargon.
Henoch, your condition?
I can continue in this body for several hours.
Fortunate. We will vacate at once.
This woman will assist me. (to Chapel) You will take me to your pharmacology laboratory.
Bones, what?
It was close, Jim. You both barely got back alive. Unless the formula works, we can't risk it again.
Now. this formula will reduce the heart action and the bodily functions to normal. While the bodies are occupied, you will administer one injection of ten cc's each hour.
I understand.
This hypo you will code mark for Thalassa. And this one you will code mark for me.
Yes, sir.
This one you will administer to Captain Kirk while Sargon is in his body.
This hypo does not contain the same formula.
No, that's correct. But since I will arrange for you to administer each of the injections, no one else will notice.
Without the same formula, Captain Kirk will die.
What were you saying?
I. I was. I wanted to say something. I've forgotten what it was.
Yes. Well, you were about to say that you watched me prepare the formula and fill each of the hypos.
Yes, that, that was it. I will inform Doctor McCoy that each is properly filled for each patient.
Very good. You see, Sargon would not permit me to keep this body. It is therefore necessary for you to kill your captain so that Sargon will die with him.
As planned, the construction of android robots is underway. All is proceeding as expected and as promised. I can find no reason for concern, but yet I am filled with foreboding.
Sargon, I remember a day long ago. We sat beside a silver lake. The air was scented with the flowers of our planet.
I remember. You held my hand like this.
I think it best not to remember so well.
In two days, you'll have your own hands, Thalassa. Mechanically efficient and quite human-looking. Android robot hands, of course. Hands without feeling. Enjoy the taste of life while you can.
Our minds will have survived. And as androids, we can move among the people who do live, teaching them, helping them not to make the errors we did.
What is it, Sargon?
Nothing. Our next injection will renovate me. Do not be concerned.
Nurse, how are the last metabolic readings on our patients?
You'll find them excellent, Doctor. Well within normal.
Is something wrong, Miss Chapel?
Er, yes. I, er, I had something to say. I can't seem to remember.
Regarding our patients?
Yes. That must be it. I am so pleased the way they are responding, Doctor. The formula's working perfectly.
You look tired, Miss Chapel. Perhaps you'd care for me to administer the last few injections.
Tired? Well, not at all, Doctor. Thank you for asking.
Thank you. Have you prepared the negaton hydracoils for the drawing Sargon supplied?
For all the good it'll do you. It's a fancy name, but how will something that looks like a drop of jelly make this thing work? You'll need microgears and a pulley that does what a muscle does.
That would be highly inefficient.
I tell you, lady, this thing won't work.
It will have twice the strength and agility of your body, engineer, and will last a thousand years. That is, assuming you'll stop wasting your time and allow us to complete it.
A thousand-year prison, Thalassa. And when it wears out we'll build another one, and we'll lock ourselves into it for another thousand years. And another, and another. Sargon has closed his mind to a better way. With these bodies.
They're not ours, Henoch.
When you awoke in this body, Thalassa, you said how good it was to breathe again, to have eyes and to see again. To feel. To live and feel again, Thalassa. Just think how much we can do for mankind. Are these bodies too much to ask for in return? Would you prefer this?
No. I'm beginning to hate it.
Sickbay.
Sickbay. McCoy.
Sargon here, McCoy. I'm in your deck six briefing room.
You sound terrible. Wait there for me.
Sargon, what is it?
Nothing of importance. Fatigue perhaps.
Henoch's formula.
Yes. I wanted to be certain there was no error. Formula is correct. Don't be concerned. It is an excellent body. There. You see? I feel better already.
In time, a host body will become accustomed to us, husband. Injections will no longer be necessary.
That will take months, perhaps years. We haven't that choice, Thalassa.
Husband. Feel the touch of my hand, husband.
No, beloved. If we torment ourselves
Beloved. What will that word mean to a machine?
Our thoughts will intertwine.
Will they, husband? Will they intertwine like this? Can two minds press close like this? Can robot lips do this? (they kiss, then Kirk falls gently to the floor) Sargon, what is it?
Hypo.
Doctor, help him!
He's dead.
All his vital organs are now working, Doctor.
Yes, we can keep them going for a few weeks, or a month. For all the good it'll do.
Why pretend to work on that thing, Henoch? You know you never intended to leave Spock's body.
This is your new home, Thalassa. Once occupied, I'll add female features and some texturing. You no doubt want the mechanism to at least appear to be a woman. (he tests its hand movement.) It is ready, Thalassa.
No!
You have no excuse to keep the real body any longer. Sargon would've required that you enter the mechanism immediately.
I cannot live in that thing.
Doctor.
Yes?
Would you like to save your Captain Kirk?
But you said that was impossible.
We have many powers Sargon did not permit us to use. He thought them too tempting to us. This body pleases me. I intend to keep it.
I see. And Henoch intends to keep Spock's body, of course.
Henoch's plans are his own affair. I wish only to exist in peace as a living woman.
If you're asking my approval
I require only your silence. Only you and I will know that Doctor Mulhall has not returned to her body. Isn't that worth your captain's life? Doctor, we can take what we wish. Neither you, this ship, nor worlds have the power to stop us.
Neither Jim nor I can trade a body we don't own. It happens to belong to a young woman.
Who you hardly know. Almost a stranger to you.
I will not peddle flesh. I'm a physician.
A physician? In contrast to what we are, you are a prancing, savage medicine man. You dare defy one you should be on your knees worshipping? I could destroy you with a single thought.
Stop! (the flames are gone) Sargon was right. The temptations within a living body are too great. Forgive me.
I am pleased, my beloved. It is good you have found the truth yourself.
Sargon? Where are you? I thought you destroyed by Henoch.
I have power even Henoch does not suspect, beloved.
Yes. Yes, I see. I understand. Just as we would have placed our consciousness within robots, Sargon has placed his into your vessel.
Doctor.
Doctor, leave us. Sargon has a plan. We have much work to do.
This is Sickbay. Get me
Nurse Chapel, what in the devil?
Jim? Are you all right?
Yes, I'm fine, Bones.
Thalassa?
She is now with Sargon, Doctor. I'm Ann Mulhall, back in my own body.
Jim, the receptacles. Spock's consciousness was in one of them.
It was necessary.
What are you talking about? There is no Spock to return to his body. You've killed a loyal officer, your best friend.
Bones, prepare a hypo. The fastest, deadliest poison to Vulcans. Spock's consciousness is gone. We must kill his body, the thing in it.
Must I make an example of you, too, Helm?
Pain, Captain. And you, my dear?
Fortunately, Doctor, I know every thought of every mind around me. See? (to Chapel) Take the hypo from him. And inject him with it.
Fools. I'll simply transfer to another place, another body.
Sargon! No, Sargon, please. Let me. Let me transfer.
Spock. My friend Spock. If there'd only been another way.
I could not allow your sacrifice of one so close to you.
Jim.
You're alive.
There was enough poison in that hypo to kill ten Vulcans.
No, Doctor. I allowed you to believe that to be true so that Henoch would read your thoughts and believe it also.
Sargon.
It seems, Doctor, the injection was only enough to cause unconsciousness.
But Henoch believed and fled the body. He is destroyed.
But your vessel was destroyed, too. Where was your consciousness kept?
The place Henoch would least suspect, Captain.
That is why I was summoned into Sickbay, Doctor. Mister Spock's consciousness was placed in me. We shared consciousness together.
We now know we cannot permit ourselves to exist in your world, my children. Thalassa and I must now also depart into oblivion.
Is there any way we can help you, Sargon?
Yes, my son. You can allow Thalassa and me to share your bodies again. A last moment together.
Oblivion together does not frighten me, beloved. Promise we'll be together.
I promise, beloved.
Together forever.
Forever beloved. Forever.
Well, I'm sure that Sargon appreciated your co-operation, Doctor Mulhall.
Yes. I was happy to co-operate, Captain.
It was beautiful.
Patterns Of Force
Passing outer planet, Zeon.
We want the inner one, Ekos. Plot a standard orbit, Mister Chekov, and take us in.
Aye, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, raise John Gill on Starfleet communications.
Aye, aye, sir.
Starfleet's been trying for six months. If he's alive, isn't it unlikely that he'd receive us now?
I don't know, Bones. We're here to find out what's happened because I don't know.
I never met John Gill, but I studied Earth history from the text he prepared.
I knew him very well. He was my instructor at the Academy.
What impressed me most was his treatment of Earth history as causes and motivations rather than dates and events.
Captain, no response on any Starfleet channel.
Spacecraft approaching from inner planet.
From Ekos?
Yes, but it must be a Zeon ship. Zeons do have a crude interplanetary capability. Reaction powered. A small rocket. It is on an intercept course. That would mean it has sophisticated detection devices which neither Zeon nor Ekos should have.
Have you raised anyone, Lieutenant?
Nothing, sir.
Captain, it's an unmanned probe which seems to be carrying a warhead.
Stand by phasers.
Phasers ready.
Range, Mister Chekov?
Two thousand kilometres, closing fast.
Fire.
Fascinating. A thermonuclear warhead.
That's generations ahead of where these people should be technically. How'd they manage that?
Maybe they had help. Maximum orbit. Take us out of range of their detection range.
Most interesting. We were attacked by a thermonuclear missile from a planet which should have no such weapon.
Orbit computed and locked in, sir.
Execute.
Captain, no response from John Gill on any channel.
He must be dead. And what's going on down there on Ekos?
According to our records, the Ekosians are a primitive, warlike people in a state of anarchy. The other planet, Zeon, has a relatively high technology, and its people are peaceful.
We've run into a far more serious problem than the disappearance of John Gill. Spock, you and I will beam down. Bones, one precaution. Prepare a subcutaneous transponder in the event we can't use our communicators.
Insert the transponders. Make one low pass to communication range in three hours. If we fail to make contact at the appointed time, take our co-ordinates from the transponder and beam us aboard no matter what our condition may be.
Aye, sir. Whatever your condition.
You ready?
Ready, Captain.
Energise.
The Ekosians are humanoid, so there is apt to be a similarity in architecture. Interesting.
Hide! They're right behind me. Hide! Hide!
Captain, the non-interference Directive.
Unbelievable. Do you recognise those uniforms?
Mid-twentieth century Earth. The nation state called Nazi Germany.
Attention. Attention. Attention. An announcement from Fuhrer Headquarters. Today, the Fuhrer has ordered our glorious capital to be made Zeon-free. Starting at dawn, our heroic troops have begun flushing out the Zeon monsters who've been poisoning our planet.
How could this have happened? The chances of another planet developing a culture like Nazi Germany, using the forms, the symbols, the uniforms of twentieth century Earth are so fantastically slim.
Virtually impossible, Captain, yet the evidence is quite clear.
The Fuhrer's headquarters reports repulsing an attack by Zeon spacecraft. Our missiles utterly destroyed the enemy.
You look quite well for a man who's been utterly destroyed, Mister Spock.
At this patriotic demonstration, Deputy Fuhrer Melakon presented the Iron Cross, second class, to Daras, hero of the Fatherland. (a blonde woman) Everywhere, preparations go forward toward the Final Decision, death to Zeon. Long live the Fatherland. Long live the Fuhrer.
That's John Gill. The Fuhrer?
Fascinating.
You're right. He's not one of us.
Look at him.
Spock, take his uniform.
You propose we pass ourselves off as Nazis, Captain?
If John Gill is the Fuhrer it would seem the logical approach.
That's very well taken, Captain.
That helmet covers a multitude of sins.
Lieutenant, what have we here? A Zeon?
Yes. Obviously he's not one of us. I captured him. Is that not correct procedure with enemies of the Fatherland?
With all Zeon pigs, Lieutenant.
Take charge of him.
With pleasure. Today we have a surprise planned for you, Zeon.
Your uniform, Captain.
Yes, it's a shame yours isn't as attractive as mine. Gestapo, I believe.
Quite correct. You should make a very convincing Nazi.
Lieutenant! Have you forgotten how to salute? (Spock salutes.) Your papers.
Your orders, Lieutenant. He wants to see your orders in the jacket. The Lieutenant's a little dazed. He captured several Zeons single-handed. One of the pigs struck him before he dropped. I promise you that pig will never get up again.
Good work, Lieutenant.
Hail the Fuhrer.
Hail to the Fuhrer.
This is a day to remember, Major.
Lieutenant? Better see a doctor. You don't look well. Your colour.
Yes. I shall tend to it, Major.
Lieutenant! Your helmet. Remove it.
We have urgent business with the Fuhrer.
Lieutenant, remove your helmet.
Enough. do you wish to speak now? Tell me your orders! You were sent to kill our Fuhrer. Confess! Do you want some more persuasion?
You're making this a rather one-sided conversation, Major.
Do not joke with me, Zeon pig. Who is this alien? Things might go easier if you tell me about him.
Let me speak to your Fuhrer. I'll tell him everything he wants to know.
You'll be glad to talk to me before I'm through.
Major.
Ah, Chairman Eneg. Your Excellency, I am honoured. I've been interrogating these spies, captured in
I've had a full report. You are not from Zeon.
Obviously.
Where do you come from?
I'll explain when I see the Fuhrer.
What is your business with the Fuhrer?
I'll discuss that only with him.
Pig! You're speaking to the Chairman of the Party.
That's enough, Major. What were the weapons found on you? What design? Our famous SS laboratories have been unable to discover how the weapons work.
Excellency, give me a few minutes with them. I promise you, I'll have
You've had a few minutes without result. The trouble with you SS is that you don't realise that punishment becomes ineffective after a certain point. Men become insensitive.
Yes, Excellency.
Lock them up. Let their pain argue with them. Then I will question them.
Excellency, the standing order is to interrogate and execute. The interrogation is finished, therefore
Finished? What have you learned? Hold them for an hour.
Excellency, the order
That is my order, Major. I suggest you do not disobey it.
Yes, Excellency. (Eneg leaves) All right, pigs. I shall keep my eye on the clock. When the hour is up, you will die most unpleasantly, I promise you! Lock them up.
John Gill was the kindest, gentlest man I ever knew. For him to be a Nazi is impossible.
Why did they take you? You're not a Zeon. He certainly is not one.
Why do the Nazis hate Zeons?
Why? Because without us to hate, there'd be nothing to hold them together. So the Party has built us into a threat, a disease to be wiped out.
Is Zeon a threat to them?
Where did you come from? Our warlike period ended dozens of generations ago. We came here. We thought we were civilising the Ekosians.
It would seem the assumption was premature.
Were they like this when you first came?
Warlike, yes, but not vicious. That started when the Nazi movement began only a few years ago.
That would coincide with the time of John Gill's arrival.
When they've destroyed us here, they will attack our planet. They'll use the technology we gave them. The danger is that taking life is so repugnant to our people, I'm afraid we'll go down without a struggle. But after what I saw in the street today, I think I could kill.
Do you know the plan of this building?
Why?
If we can get to the SS weapons laboratory, get our weapons back, we might be able to stop the slaughter.
Why should you be interested in saving Zeons?
We must get our communicators, contact the ship.
Captain, the flaw in the plan is this locked door, and the guard beyond it. To the logical mind, the outlook is somewhat gloomy.
The transponders.
Yes.
And a way to shed some light on the gloom, Mister Spock.
Of course. The rubindium crystals in the transponders.
Are you trying to kill yourselves?
I know it's there. McCoy put it in. There. Do you have the figures computed?
Yes. We must hold the crystals rigidly at a specific distance, which I believe should be twenty seven point two millimetres.
Twenty seven point two millimetres would be, approximately, there. That is, of course, a crude estimation.
What is it you're making, some kind of radio?
No, not a radio. The power from this light is very low.
Yes. To reach that light, I shall require some sort of platform.
I would be honoured, Mister Spock.
Now, the rubindium crystals should find enough power here to achieve the necessary stimulus. As I recall from the history of physics, the ancient lasers were able to achieve the necessary excitation, even using crude natural crystals.
Oh, Mister Spock, the guard did a professional job on my back. I'd appreciate it if you'd hurry.
Yes, of course, Captain. You realise that the aim will of course be very crude.
(in pain) I don't care if you hit the broad side of a barn. Just hurry, please.
Captain, why should I aim at such a structure?
Never mind, Spock. Just get on with the job.
Oh, my goodness. Beautiful. Oh, Spock Spock! (Spock gets down) Beautiful. Over there. I'll create a commotion.
Help! Help! I'll talk! I'll talk! I can't stand it anymore! I'll talk! Guard! Guard, I'll talk!
Guard, I'll talk. I'll talk. The pain
Take me with you. Give me a chance to fight them.
May I remind you, we did not intend to fight.
Take me with you, or you'll never find the laboratory.
Take him with us, Mister Spock. He's got a point. He's our guide.
Which is the laboratory door?
The end of the hall.
All right, Zeon pigs, move. (He stumbles against the Nazi.) Zeon pigs. They do nothing right. Don't worry. They're on their way to the laboratory, for experimental work. They'll pay. Move!
Move, move.
(giving the pistol to Isak) Cover the door.
Here they are. The communicators, disassembled. Can you get one to work?
Possibly.
Who are you people?
I do not see them.
Where do you come from?
(reading a clipboard) The alien pistols have been sent to Gestapo Command Headquarters. Well, that takes care of the phasers.
You Zeons, for peaceful people, are pretty thorough.
Yes. With this uniform, we can steal a car, get out of the capital.
We came for John Gill.
Captain, without phasers, and until we are able to communicate with the ship, it is illogical to assume that we can hold out against the entire military force of this planet.
All right, Mister Spock. You've made your point. Get into the uniform and hide those ears again.
Hunting's good. We've caught so many Zeons, we've got to dump them outside.
It's all right. They helped me escape from the prison. I owe them my life.
Isak, what is all this?
Abrom! Abrom, thank God you're well. This is my brother. They were in the prison. Beaten as I was, Abrom.
Why were you in their prison?
I was trying to see the Fuhrer.
The Fuhrer?
If I can see him, there may be a way of stopping this insanity.
Abrom, I owe them my life.
Isak, Uletta is dead. Shot down in the streets.
She would've been my wife.
She lived for five hours while they walked past her and spat on her. Our own people were unable to help her. Now you ask me to help strangers.
If we adopt the ways of the Nazis, we're as bad as the Nazis.
Captain, I suggest the most profitable use of our time would be to reassemble our communicators. May I work undisturbed somewhere?
This way.
By using parts from both, I've completed one communicator. I do not know if the circuits are correct, Captain. There is no way to test it, except in actual use.
The Enterprise won't be within range for another hour.
Over there. Against the wall, all of you.
The girl on the viewscreen.
The one receiving a medal.
Daras.
Quiet. Hands in the air, Zeon swine. So you're the three who escaped from the Chancellery detention centre. What was your plan? Speak. It's the last chance you'll get.
I must see the Fuhrer. It's urgent.
Urgent? I'll bet it is.
I alone am responsible for what happens here.
Do you know what we do to responsible Zeons?
Now we finish the job.
Stop, Nazis. After you've killed the last of us off, what do you do, turn the guns against yourselves?
Don't shoot. Don't shoot, please.
No, wait. (gets up) No more. You've proved they're on our side.
Now, please forgive us, but we had to be absolutely certain.
Yes. If we had taken you into our confidence, we could've betrayed all our people if you'd been Nazi spies. All right, leave us.
The Gestapo methods are frighteningly efficient. We must be very, very careful in order to survive here. We of the Underground don't know who our leaders are. That way, if we break under pressure, we can only betray a handful of our people.
This young lady is a Nazi, a hero of the Fatherland. We saw her being decorated.
I'm an Ekosian fighting the terrible thing that's happened to my people. The decoration was for betraying my own father to the Party. It was my father's idea. You see, he used to be very close to the Fuhrer. Then he saw the changes and where they were leading. He turned against the Party. They imprisoned him. Melakon sentenced him to death.
Melakon?
The Deputy Fuhrer. He's taken over.
My father denounced me, making it appear like I'd betrayed him. He gave me a weapon to continue the fight with.
How could this have seemed right to John Gill?
Who?
John Gill, your Fuhrer. He's one of our people.
And what is your people?
I'm Captain James Kirk of the United Spaceship Enterprise. This is my first officer, Mister Spock. John Gill, your Fuhrer, was sent here by the Federation as a cultural observer.
You mean that the Fuhrer is an alien?
That is correct.
I grew up to admire him, later to hate and despise everything he stands for. But I always thought he was one of us. Now to hear that he's an alien sent here to destroy us
That was not his mission, ever. He was sent here to observe, not to interfere. Something went wrong, and that's why we're here. To find out and to correct. We must see him.
It's impossible. Even if this were another time, it still would be impossible. He sees no one. No one but Melakon. He's under maximum security.
Maximum security. Is he so afraid?
There are many of us, both Ekosians and younger Zeons, who would gladly risk our lives to kill him.
I don't understand what's going on here. This goes against every principle that John Gill ever believed in. Our only chance is to see him, and quickly.
He makes a speech tonight from the Chancellery. All the top Party officials will be there.
Will you be there?
Of course. As a symbol of the proper attitude toward the Fatherland.
As an honoured member of the Party, she could get us past the guards.
Only the top, most trusted, officials will be allowed in. The country will watch on the viewscreens.
I'm afraid it will be a formal declaration of war against Zeon. Their Final Solution.
You must get us in there.
It would be suicide.
Well it's a risk living at all the way things are going. If the Captain believes he has a chance, I'm willing to commit suicide with him.
You, a Zeon? You expect to get into the Chancellery?
It's even more my fight than yours.
Lights.
You, what is your business here?
Get me some lights on her.
It's Party Secretary Daras.
(marching into the building.) The Fuhrer's special documentary corps. Smile, Corporal.
Excuse me.
Captain, I'm beginning to understand why you Earthmen enjoy gambling. No matter how carefully one computes the odds of success, there is still a certain exhilaration in the risk.
Very good, Spock. We may make a human of you yet.
Let's go.
Lights. (he films Eneg leaving) Thank you. Where does the Fuhrer enter?
He doesn't. They watch him on the big screen. There, at the end of the room. He broadcasts from the booth for security.
They've got the booth curtained off. Bring that light to the side of her face. Where's the entrance to the broadcast booth?
There, at the end of the corridor. You're not going to try to get into the broadcast booth.
We're going to try.
Sir, is this light better here?
Good.
If you distract the guard long enough, I can get a machine gun. It's a small booth, I could shoot through the door.
We're here to get John Gill, and alive, not for your personal satisfaction. Is that clear? Let's try down there.
Lights, please. Gentlemen, this is for the record of the Fuhrer's Final Solution speech.
We're documenting the men responsible for
Smile, gentlemen. There will be more coverage later. Thank you very much. Let's get a moving shot down the hall.
So, what have we accomplished? You should have let me shoot him.
Captain, it was John Gill, but he never moved. Never once looked up.
Yes, well, that may be part of the plan, the semi-divine detachment.
Or a deep psychosis.
It may be simpler than that. He may be drugged. We need McCoy. Is there a place, a room we can be alone for a few minutes? I'm going to send for help.
Send for?
It takes too long to explain. Any place will do.
The cloakroom?
It may not have the range it had. In fact, it may not work at all.
Think positively, Spock.
Spock to Enterprise. Spock to Enterprise. Come in, Enterprise.
Enterprise. Lieutenant Uhura.
Captain here. Put McCoy on.
Yes, sir. Captain, we're not reading you well. You're nine points into the low-frequency band.
We've having difficulty. Patch historical computer into uniform section. I want McCoy outfitted as a Gestapo doctor Nazi Germany, old Earth date 1944. Make him a colonel.
Yes, sir.
Search the building.
What have you got, Jim?
We found John Gill. At least, we've seen him. He may be drugged, hypnotised, or psychotic. You'll have to make a determination. Hurry with that uniform.
What is it?
Isak just heard two security men. They picked up your broadcast, pin-pointed it within this building. They're starting to search.
If there's going to be a delay in transporting the doctor, I suggest we cancel our
Kirk to Enterprise. What's happening up there?
Doctor McCoy is having difficulty with that uniform, sir.
Send him down naked if you have to. Kirk out.
It's true. I only half-believed what you said.
Stupid computer made a mistake in the measurements. The right boot's too tight.
There is a logical way to proceed, Doctor. Point your toe, apply equal pressure to either side of the boot, and push. We have no time for emotionalism.
This is Doctor McCoy, our Chief Medical Officer. Daras, secretary to the National Socialist Party.
How do you do? What in blazes is this?
Chairman Eneg.
The Colonel is drunk. He's had a little too much to drink.
I see.
Yes, he thought he would embarrass the Fuhrer.
Yes. A doctor should have more pride.
You were right to conceal him. There's a spy in this building with a secret transmitter. We're conducting a search. Hail the Fuhrer.
Hail the Fuhrer.
Captain, I do not understand how he failed to recognise us.
Nor do I, but luck is something you also fail to recognise, Mister Spock.
True. I shall reconsider.
The Fuhrer's speech.
Let's go.
Hail the Fuhrer! Hail the Fuhrer! Hail the Fuhrer! Hail the Fuhrer! 
Ekosians. The job ahead is difficult. It requires courage and dedication. It requires faith. The Zeon colony has existed for nearly half a century.
Watch his mouth.
If we fulfill our own greatness, that will all be ended. Working together
Captain, the speech follows no logical pattern.
Random sentences strung together.
Will at times be difficult.
He looks drugged, Jim. Almost at a cataleptic state.
To reach our goal, And we will reach that goal.
I have to have a close look at him.
must be decisive. Every thought directed toward a goal. This planet can become a paradise, if we are willing to pay the price. As each cell in the body works with discipline and harmony for the good of the entire being
(to guards) Gentlemen, I want a picture of you two with the Hero of the Fatherland listening to the stirring Fuhrer's speech. Get that light over there, please. Get this light around here. Smile, gentlemen. Turn around, smile, and now.
It's locked. Keys.
Hail the Fuhrer!
Hail the Fuhrer!
Hail the Fuhrer!
The Fuhrer has given us our orders, and we pledge him our lives in this sacred task. Death to Zeon!
Death to Zeon! Death to Zeon!
Death to Zeon! Death to Zeon!
Definitely drugged, almost comatose.
What drug?
I can't identify it without a medi-comp. Without knowing, an antidote would be dangerous.
Is there anything you do?
I can give him a general stimulant, but it would be risky.
Take the risk.
But despite our best efforts, they remain like a cancer, eating away at our state.
There's no reaction. Whatever you gave him isn't working.
Bones, increase the dosage.
I'm working in the dark. I could kill him.
If they find us here, we'll all be killed.
Ten minutes ago, on our Fuhrer's orders, our troops began their historic mission.
In the cities, the eliminations have started. Within an hour, the Zeon blight will forever be removed from Ekos.
It's begun. It's finally begun.
The stimulant's working.
I now announce the glorious final solution.
He's reaching a level of consciousness. It's almost like he's in a light sleep. Now, that's as much as I dare do.
Our entire solar system will forever be rid of the disease that was Zeon.
Spock, try to get through to him with a mind probe. If you can't, Bones, you'll have to use a stronger stimulant, no matter what it does.
Our space fleet is on its way toward Zeon, both manned and unmanned weapons.
This is the time of destiny. Hail victory!
Hail victory! Hail victory! Hail victory!
There's one chance left. If you'd use the weapons you have, you could destroy the fleet.
That would mean the death of thousands of Ekosian spacemen.
Many of my friends are aboard that ship, many of the Underground.
Yes, but against those thousands are millions of innocent Zeon lives. You've got to choose the lesser of two evils.
We could save Zeon, but what about Ekos?
Captain. I have created a condition in which Gill cannot initiate speech or any other action, but he can reply to questions.
Well done, Spock. They've kept what's left of him as a figure head.
Quite correct. For the last few years, the real power has been Melakon.
Gill. Gill, why did you abandon your mission? Why did you interfere with this culture?
Planet fragmented. Divided. Took lesson from Earth history.
But why Nazi Germany? You studied history. You knew what the Nazis were.
Most efficient state Earth ever knew.
Quite true, Captain. That tiny country, beaten, bankrupt, defeated, rose in a few years to stand only one step away from global domination.
But it was brutal, perverted, had to be destroyed at a terrible cost. Why that example?
Perhaps Gill felt that such a state, run benignly, could accomplish its efficiency without sadism.
Why, Gill? Why?
Worked. At first it worked. Then Melakon began take over. Used the. Gave me the drug.
Gill. Gill. Gill, can you hear me? You've got to tell those people what happened! You're the only one who can prevent the slaughter! Gill!
He's still alive, but the drug they use is too strong. If I give him another shot
Bones, give him another shot!
I don't dare.
(watching the door) Guards.
We've run out of time, Bones. No, wait. (to Daras, with a rifle) Aim it at Spock. Spock, take off the helmet.
For the second time in one day, Daras is a hero to the Fatherland.
She captured a Zeon spy that was attempting to assassinate the Fuhrer.
Guards.
Yes, let us make an example of this traitor once and for all.
We'll make a present of him to Melakon.
Chairman Eneg, this spy must be taken to Melakon.
Pass them on my responsibility.
Eneg is one of us.
Stay close to Spock. Stall for time. And hope.
What is this?
A spy, Excellency.
A rare prize. The Deputy Fuhrer can see this is no ordinary Zeon.
No, not a Zeon, definitely not.
Professor Gill, can you hear me? You've got to speak. You've got to speak. This is our last chance. Gill?
The Deputy Fuhrer's an authority on the genetics of racial purity. How would you classify this one?
Very difficult. Note the sinister eyes and the malformed ears. Definitely an inferior race.
Professor. Professor! You've got to talk! You've got to tell them what happened. You've got to come out of it. Come on, Professor. Come on. Come on.
Note the low forehead, denoting stupidity. The dull look of a trapped animal. You may take him now for interrogation, but I want the body saved for the Cultural Museum. He'll make an interesting display.
People. People of Ekos.
Go to the booth. See to the Fuhrer at once. He's ill. Turn off that camera.
Hear me.
I suggest we leave and let our Fuhrer rest.
We were betrayed by a self-seeking adventurer who has led us all to the very brink of disaster. I order the immediate recall of the space fleet. This attack must stop. All units are to return to base. To Zeon I promise, this was not an aggression of Ekosian people.
Only one evil man. Melakon
Is a traitor to his own people and all that we stand for. To the Zeon people, I promise reparation and
Wait, soldier. There's been enough killing. Now we'll start to live the way the Fuhrer meant us to live.
(shot and dying in Kirk's arms) I was wrong. The non-interference Directive is the only way. We must stop the slaughter.
You did that, Professor. You told them in time.
Even historians fail to learn from history. They repeat the same mistakes. Let the killing end. Let (dies)
Is he dead, Captain?
Dead.
For so long I've prayed for this. Now I'm sorry.
So is he.
You've given us all a new chance.
Thank you, but go now. We must do the rest.
Eneg and I will go on the air, offer a new way for our people. For all our people, both Zeons and Ekosians.
It is time to stop the bloodshed, to bury our dead.
Mister Spock, I think the planet is in good hands.
Indeed, Captain. With the union of two cultures, this system would make a fine addition to the Federation.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise here, Captain.
Beam us aboard.
Captain, I never will understand humans. How could a man as brilliant, a mind as logical as John Gill's, have made such a fatal error?
He drew the wrong conclusion from history. The problem with the Nazis wasn't simply that their leaders were evil, psychotic men. They were, but the main problem, I think, was the leader principle.
What he's saying, Spock, is that a man who holds that much power, even with the best intentions, just can't resist the urge to play God.
Thank you, Doctor. I was able to gather the meaning.
It also proves another Earth saying. Absolute power corrupts absolutely. Darn clever, these Earthmen, wouldn't you say?
Yes. Earthmen like Ramses, Alexander, Caesar, Napoleon, Hitler, Lee Kuan. Your whole Earth history is made up of men seeking absolute power.
Spock, you obviously don't understand
Obviously, Doctor, you fail to accept
Gentlemen. Gentlemen, we've just been through one civil war. Let's not start another. Mister Chekov, take us out of orbit. Warp factor two, and hurry.
By Any Other Name
No life form readings, Captain. Continuing scan.
Well, somebody sent a distress call.
No sign of the spaceship. No sign of debris.
I am getting readings on small metallic objects, Captain. It is possible the ship was destroyed in space and the survivors proceeded here in a shuttle craft.
But where are they?
Captain, I'm getting a reading now. Two human forms at bearing three hundred mark seven.
Confirmed.
I'm Captain James T. Kirk, of the starship Enterprise. We came in answer to your distress call.
It was very kind of you to respond so quickly, captain. Now you will surrender your ship to me.
You have a very strange sense of humour, Mister
I am Rojan of Kelva. I am your commander from this moment on. Any efforts to resist us or to escape will be severely punished. Soon we, and you, will leave this galaxy forever. You humans must face the end of your existence as you have known it. You are all paralyzed by a selective field that neutralises nerve impulses to the voluntary muscles. We can control you at will. I will now release you.
Stay there.
Captain.
It's all right.
Interesting. A neural field?
Yes. Radiating from a central projector.
What do you want?
Your ship, Captain Kirk. It will serve us well in the long voyage that is to come.
Voyage? Where?
To your neighbouring galaxy, which you call Andromeda.
Andromeda? Why?
It is our home.
What brings you here?
Within ten millennia, high radiation levels in our galaxy will make life there impossible. So the Kelvan Empire sent forth ships to explore other galaxies, to search for one which our race could conquer and occupy.
Well, sorry. This galaxy is already occupied.
Captain, you think you are unconquerable and your ship impregnable, but while we've talked, the capture has already begun.
Something penetrating from the planet.
Increase power to shields.
It's dead, sir. All major power disabled.
Sound Red Alert.
Red Alert. All personnel, man your battle stations. Go to Red Alert.
Engineering, come in.
Life support, come in.
Drea, Tomar, report.
Life support control, secure.
Engineering is secure.
Rojan, Hanar here.
Report, Hanar.
The ship is ours. We control the bridge, engineering, and life support systems.
Proceed with your orders.
What's the point of capturing my ship? Even at maximum warp, the Enterprise couldn't get to Andromeda galaxy for thousands of years.
Captain, we will modify its engines, in order to produce velocities far beyond the reach of your science. The journey between galaxies will take less than three hundred of your years.
You made a voyage of three hundred years?
Our ships were of multigeneration design. We were born in the intergalactic void. We shall die there during our return journey.
And our mission will be completed by a commander who is my descendant.
What happened to your ship?
There is an energy barrier at the rim of your galaxy.
Yes, I know. We've been there.
We managed to break through it with great difficulty. Our ship was destroyed. We barely managed to escape in a lifecraft. And now we have the means to begin our journey back to Andromeda.
Why use our vessel? Why not transmit a message to your galaxy?
No form of transmission can penetrate the barrier.
Rojan, there's no reason to do this by force. Let's take your problem to the Federation. Research expeditions have catalogued hundreds of uninhabited planets in this galaxy suitable for colonization.
We do not colonize. We conquer. We rule. There's no other way for us.
In other words, the galaxy isn't big enough for both of us.
The Federation has handled foreign invasions before.
Captain, we can control the Federation as easily as we can control you. The fate of the inferior in any galaxy.
All is proceeding according to plan, Rojan.
Kelinda, take them to the holding area. We'll keep you and your party here, Captain. Your crew will undoubtedly wish to co-operate with us if they understand that you are hostages.
Move there.
Tomar has examined the ship. The modifications are underway.
Space again, Hanar. I do not think we could have kept our sanity living too long on this accursed planet.
It is an undisciplined environment. One cannot control it. Yet there are things of interest.
Yes, but disturbing. These shells in which we've encased ourselves, they have such heightened senses. To feel. To hear. To smell. How do humans manage to exist in these fragile cases?
Since the ship was designed to sustain these forms, we have little choice.
At least we'll be away from all of this openness. This is too strange for us, Hanar. We are creatures of outer space, and soon we will be safe in the comforting closeness of walls.
Fascinating material. Similar to diburnium, but considerably more dense. I doubt even phaser fire could disturb its molecular structure.
All right. We can't break out. There must be another way.
Captain, what do they want from us. What kind of people are they?
That's a very good question.
They registered as human.
No, Doctor. More than that. They registered as perfect human life forms. I recall noting the readings were almost classic textbook responses. Most curious.
Spock, what are the odds in such absolute duplication of life forms in another galaxy?
The chances are very much against it.
Captain. (Kalinda has appeared so they move away from the door) Captain. However perfect they are, there don't seem to be very many of them. Why...
They have the paralysis field. Rojan mentioned something about a central projector.
Yes. If we could put that out of operation, we might have a chance.
Gentlemen, I'm constrained to point out we do not even know what this projector looks like.
Those devices on their belts might indicate the source of the force field.
Possible. I would have to have one to examine.
You'll have one, sir, if I have to rip one of the Kelvans apart to get it for you.
You'll get your chance, but you'll do it under orders.
Yes, sir.
On Eminiar Seven, you were able to trick the guard by a Vulcan mind probe.
Yes, I recall, Captain. I led him to believe we had escaped.
Do you think you can do it again?
I shall attempt it.
Are you all right?
Yes, I will be all right, Captain. We must hurry.
(releasing Kirk) This cannot go unpunished. Hanar. That one. (the guard) Take him aside. Kelinda, the female.
Captain?
Go. As a leader, you realize the importance of discipline. I need you and these other specialists, but those two are unnecessary.
I'm responsible. Let them go.
I think we're somewhat alike, Captain. Each of us cares less for his own safety than for the lives of his command. We feel pain when others suffer for our mistakes. Your punishment shall be to watch them die. Captain. Proceed, Hanar.
Bring them to me. This is the essence of what they were. The flesh and brain and what you call the personality, distilled down into these compact shapes. And once crushed (he demonstrates) this person is dead. However, that one can be restored. (throws it on the ground) Hanar?
Spock, are you sure you're all right?
Yes, quite all right, Doctor.
You didn't look very well when you broke that mind touch.
I did not break it, Doctor. I was thrown away by something I've never experienced before.
What was it?
A series of bizarre and exotic images bursting on my mind and consciousness. Colours, shapes, mathematical equations fused and blurred. I've been attempting to isolate them, but so far I've been able to recall clearly only one. Immense beings, a hundred limbs which resemble tentacles. Minds of such control and capacity that each limb is capable of performing a different function.
Do you mean that's what the Kelvans really are?
Undoubtedly.
Well, if they look that way normally, why did they adapt themselves to our bodies?
Perhaps practicality. They chose the Enterprise as the best vessel for the trip. Immense beings with a hundred tentacles would have difficulty with the turbolift. We've got to stop them. We outnumber them. Their only hold on us is the paralysis field.
Well, that's enough. One wrong move, and they jam all our neural circuits.
Jam. Spock, if you reverse the circuits on McCoy's neuro-analyser, can you set up a counter field to jam the paralysis projector?
I'm dubious of the possibilities of success, Captain. The medical equipment is not designed to put out a great deal of power. The polarized elements would burn out quickly.
Is there a chance at all?
A small one.
We'll take it. You and Bones have to get to the ship.
How?
Yes. Mister Spock, you're sick.
I assure you, Captain, I am in perfect health.
No, you're not. Doctor McCoy has given you an thorough examination, and you're ill. In fact, if you don't get to the sickbay, you're going to die.
It's a good idea, Jim, but anyone looking at him can tell he's healthy.
Vulcans have the ability to place themselves in a kind of trance, complete relaxation of every part of the mind and body.
We find it more restful to the body than your so-called vacation.
Can you do it now and come out of it in the sickbay, say in half an hour?
It will take me a moment to prepare.
Go ahead.
Jim, his heartbeat really is slow. His pulse is practically non-existent. 
(goes to the door) Hanar? Hanar.
What do you want, human?
Mister Spock is ill. The doctor thinks he may be dying.
This illness came on him rather suddenly. Is it not unusual?
He's a Vulcan. They don't react like humans. 
He may die. If I can get him up to sickbay, there's a chance he'll live.
Stand away from the door. (enters the cell for a closer look) I will have you beamed aboard.
Do what you can with him, Bones.
Doctor, what happened?
Prepare two ccs of stokaline.
Stokaline? But, doctor, that's
Don't argue, nurse. Just get it. (injects Spock) This may be the turning point. Prepare another shot.
But, Doctor
Please, nurse, just follow orders, will you?
There, that should do it. Just let him rest now. (to Tomar) You see, it's a flare-up of Rigelian Kassaba Fever. He suffered from it about ten years ago, and it recurs every now and then. There's no danger if he gets medication in time. He'll be all right in a couple of hours.
Very well. I will inform Rojan. You will stay here.
What do you want from me now?
We will beam aboard the vessel shortly. I wish you to understand your duties.
My duty is to stop you in any way I can.
You will obey.
Or you will kill more of my people?
Captain Kirk, I cannot believe that you do not understand the importance of my mission. We Kelvans have a code of honour. Harsh, demanding. It calls for much from us and much from those whom we conquer. You have been conquered. I respect your devotion to your duty, but I cannot permit it to interfere with mine.
(picking a flower and smelling it) These are lovely. Captain Kirk, what is it you call them?
Flowers. I don't know the variety.
Our memory tapes tell us of such things on Kelvan. Crystals that form with such rapidity, they seem to grow. They look like this fragile thing somewhat. We call them Sahsheer. 
A rose by any other name.
Captain?
A quote from a great human poet, Shakespeare. That which we call a rose by any other name would smell as sweet.
Drea has computed and laid a course for Kelva, Captain.
We've jumped to warp eight.
And we'll go faster yet. Increase speed to warp eleven.
Increase speed to warp eleven, Mister Chekov.
On course and proceeding as planned. We will approach the barrier within an hour.
Very well.
Rojan, I'm going to sickbay. My first officer was taken ill.
Yes, I was informed. You may go.
Anything?
I've located their power source, captain. It's installed in Engineering.
We're just going to jam it.
I've tied in all the lab computers. That will give it a bit more power to push with.
This is it. Now all we have to do
Whatever it is we must do, it is impossible.
Why?
This material surrounding the projector is the same as I discovered on the planet. Readings indicate it is impervious to any of our weapons. We cannot penetrate the casing to get to the machine.
That's it, then.
There is one other possibility, Mister Scott. The final decision, of course, must be the captain's, but I believe we must have it ready for him. The Enterprise is propelled by matter-anti-matter reactors. The barrier we must traverse is negative energy.
I see what you're getting at. I can't say I like it.
Nor I. But it must be made available to the captain.
Captain Kirk to the bridge, please.
Well?
Impossible, Captain. The power source is protected by a material we cannot breach even with our phasers. Mister Scott and I have prepared the means for the only logical alternative available to us.
What alternative?
The barrier we must penetrate is composed of negative energy.
I have opened the control valves to the matter-anti-matter nacelles. On your signal, I will flood them with positive energy.
What?
When we engage the barrier, the ship will explode. The Kelvans will be stopped here.
And so will we.
Are you mad? I can't just
Take your places, gentlemen. We're approaching the barrier.
Reading, Spock.
Sensors indicate density negative, radiation negative, energy negative. (Kirk starts chewing his nails with indecision) All instruments off the dials, Captain. We are in contact with the barrier. 
Outside hull temperatures rising, sir. It's over two thousand degrees now. Sir?
Hold your position.
We made it.
Instruments returning to normal, Captain.
All decks report. Damage and casualties.
Several systems out, sir. Operating on emergency backup. None affect flight procedure.
Life support systems sustaining on emergency.
I'll have a full report on ship's status for you in a moment, sir.
Your people are most efficient, Captain.
Thank you. So are yours.
Hanar, start the neutralising operation.
What neutralising operation?
You humans are troublesome for us. We needed you to get us through the barrier. But there aren't enough of us to efficiently guard all of you of the time. Further, the food synthesisers cannot manufacture enough food for the entire journey. We are therefore neutralising all nonessential personnel.
No!
The procedure is already underway. Now, as to bridge personnel. Drea? We have no need for communication.
And since Drea is capable of handling the ship from here on.
Do you not agree that this is better thing for them than exploding the ship as your engineer had thought to do? We detected it, of course. Tomar has devised a mechanism to prevent any further tampering. Please accept your situation, Captain. It will make things much less painful.
Is this all?
I have reviewed ship's personnel, Captain. It appears we four are the only ones the Kelvans consider essential.
Scotty tells me you could've destroyed the ship in the barrier. Why didn't you?
I couldn't.
But that was our only chance to stop them
I didn't think it was.
Jim
Bones, that's enough!
Jim, I saw them reduce four of my doctors and nurses into those little
They've reduced the whole crew! (thumps table in anger)
I do not understand why you take the trouble to consume this bulk material to sustain yourselves. (holds up a pill box) We have ascertained that these contain all the nutritional elements.
Before you condemn it, why not try it?
I believe I will. Assist me.
It's your idea, Doctor. Go ahead.
All right, I'll show you how to work the selector.
(whispering) Sir, why don't we try again to knock out the paralysis projector? I know the casing looks impenetrable, but I may be able to do something.
Even if we could, it's out of the question. We need that projector to bring our people back to human form.
Then how will we stop the Kelvans?
Captain?
It's quite good.
I'm delighted.
Most curious.
What is?
The isolated glimpses of things I saw when I touched Kelinda's mind are beginning to coalesce in my consciousness. The Kelvans have superior intellectual capacity. To achieve it, they have apparently sacrificed anything which would tend to distract them. Perceptive senses such as taste, touch, smell, and, of course, emotions.
But then Tomar shouldn't be enjoying the taste of his food.
Yes. Quite correct, Captain. But they have taken human form and are therefore having human reaction.
If he keeps reacting like that, he's going to need a diet.
If they all respond to stimulation of the senses, then maybe we can distract them. They can't have been able to handle the senses yet. If we can confuse them enough, we can get those devices from their belts.
That seems reasonable.
All right. It may be our only chance. Look for any way to stimulate the senses.
I can think of one way right off. (goes over to Tomar) Lad, you're going to need something to wash that down with. Have you ever tried any Saurian brandy?
I don't know about that.
Please articulate.
Well, that body of yours is a bit anaemic. Comes from taking food in pills instead of solid sustenance.
What are you doing?
I'm going to give you a shot. High-potency vitamin concentrate. You'll need three a day for a few days. And eat some solid food, will you?
No more.
Am I disturbing you?
What is it you wish?
I wish to apologise.
I don't understand, Captain.
For hitting you. I'm sorry.
That is not necessary. You attempted to escape as we would have.
Yes, well, I don't usually go around beating up beautiful women.
Why not?
Well, there are better things for men and women to do.
Like what?
Is this where I hit you?
No, the other side.
Oh. I'm sorry. (he kisses it) Is that better?
Better? Was it intended as a remedy?
This is.
Is there some significance to this action?
Well, among humans, it's meant to express warmth and love.
Oh. You are trying to seduce me. I have been studying you.
Me?
All humans. This business of love. You have devoted much literature to it. Why do you build such a mystique around a simple biological function?
We enjoy it.
The literature?
Kelinda, I'm sorry I brought up the whole subject.
Do you really regard this touching of the lips as pleasurable?
I did.
Curious. Let me try.
Is there some problem, Captain?
Not when I came in.
What did he want here?
He came to apologise for hitting me. Apparently it involves some peculiar touching contact.
In what manner? (she kisses him) Very odd creatures, these humans.
Do you have more?
Not of this.
Anything.
Yes. Humans are very peculiar. I often find them unfathomable, but an interesting psychological study. 
Well, I do not understand this business of pressing with the lips to apologise.
I believe you're referring to a kiss. But it is my understanding that such apologies are usually exchanged between people who have some affection for each other.
Kelinda has no affection for Captain Kirk.
Your game is off. Are you disturbed by the incident?
Why should I be disturbed?
You've known Kelinda for some time. She's a Kelvan as you are. Among humans, I've found the symptoms you're displaying usually indicate jealousy.
I have no reason for such a reaction. Kelinda's a female, nothing more.
Captain Kirk seems to find her quite attractive.
Well, of course she is!
You are not jealous?
No!
Nor upset?
Certainly not.
Checkmate.
I found this on Ganymood, er, Ganymede.
What is it?
Well, it's, er. (peers at it, sniffs it) It's green.
Kelinda, I've been thinking.
Yes?
I do not wish you to fraternise with any of the humans.
Why not?
Well, they, they offer such strange ideas. They're not meant for us. Not for Kelvans.
Have you given this order to the others?
No. And I wish you to particularly avoid Captain Kirk.
I will not. You have told me over and over again, humans are no threat to us. We are superior. I will do as I please.
You will do as I say, or I will neutralise your Captain Kirk and all the other humans as well.
How many more of these?
Well, now, let's see. You've had three shots. I think you better stay on them for a few days, and then we'll see how you're responding.
I see no reason for you to refer to yourself in the plural.
You have more?
All I have is a bottle of very, very, very old Scotch. Whisky!
I will try it.
I'll get it! (takes the helmet off a breastplate and reaches in, removing a very dusty bottle.) I was saving you for
What?
Never mind. Gie us your glass.
The thing is, I can't tell if we're getting anywhere. And I haven't seen Scotty in hours.
We haven't seen Tomar either. But my man Hanar is getting more irritable by the minute. I'm giving him shots of formazine. That should have him climbing the walls.
Rojan has exhibited symptoms of jealousy.
I would like to speak with you, Captain.
Doctor, I'm due for another injection of stokaline.
Hmm?
Stokaline.
Oh. You will pardon us.
You had something to say?
Yes. This cultural mystique surrounding the biological function.
Yes?
You realise humans are overly preoccupied with the subject.
Yes. We do think a great deal about it.
I've done some supplemental reading on it, and, er
You have a question?
Yes. I was wondering, would you please apologise to me again?
Rojan, I want to talk to you.
Very well.
First, I do not like the way responsibility and duty has been portioned out to us.
It's the way your duties have always been assigned.
That is my second quarrel with you.
Hanar!
And further, I do not care much for the way you run this ship.
Hanar, confine yourself to your quarters!
(coming up for air) Rojan has forbidden me to see you.
Yes, that's too bad. Why do you defy him?
It's not a question of defiance. We were told to find out everything we could about you.
Huh. And how's the research going?
I need some more experiments.
Mister Spock, you were not ordered to the bridge. What is your purpose here?
Automatic sensors and various other recording devices require monitoring and periodic adjustments.
Very well. Proceed. Have you seen Captain Kirk?
If you wish, I shall call him to the bridge.
No. I was wondering where he was.
I left him in the recreation room.
He was alone then.
No, Kelinda was with him. She seemed anxious to speak to him.
I told her to stay away from him.
It would appear, sir, that you have little control over her. Or perhaps Captain Kirk has more.
Very interesting. But I feel rather strange.
We did it, you and me. Put him right under the table. (takes the paralyser off Tomar's belt) I'll take this to the captain.
Kelinda, I told you to avoid this human.
I did not wish to.
I am your commander.
That's not enough, Rojan.
You did this to her, corrupted her, turned her away from me!
If you can't keep her, that's not my problem.
You will release her!
Why don't you use your paralyser? You thought I was taking your woman away from you. You're jealous! You tried to kill me with your bare hands. Would a Kelvan do that? Would he have to? You're reacting with the emotions of a human. You are a human.
No, I cannot be!
I'm stimulating him. (McCoy pushes him back into the fight.) You have no choice. To use this ship, you have to use our form and now you're stuck with it, you and your descendants, for the next three hundred years.
You fool. These bodies are tools. We remain Kelvans!
Look what's happened in the short time you've been exposed to us. What do you think will happen in three centuries? When this ship gets to Kelva, the people on it will be human. They'll be aliens. Enemies!
We have a duty, our mission. We've got to accomplish any way we can.
Your mission is to find new worlds for your people to live in. You can still do that. We can bring this problem to the Federation. There are many planets in this galaxy that can be inhabited.
You would really do that? You would extend welcome to invaders?
No. But we would welcome friends.
Rojan, you are only a link in a chain, following an order given three hundred years ago. This is an opportunity for you to establish a destiny of your own.
Perhaps. Perhaps it could be done.
A robot ship could be sent to Kelva with the Federation proposal.
But if we retain this form, where could we find a place?
Seems to me that little planet you were on is kind of nice.
And you. You would wish to remain with him?
He's most interesting, but I wish to go with you. I believe I owe you an apology. (she kisses Rojan) It's most pleasurable.
Yes. Very curious.
You see, Rojan, being human does have certain advantages. Being able to appreciate the beauty of a flower or a woman.
Bridge, this is Rojan.
Yes, Commander.
I'm returning command of the ship to Captain Kirk. You will follow his orders.
Sir?
Turn the ship around. We're going home.
The Omega Glory
Approaching planet Omega Four, sir. Object ahead. Another vessel in planet orbit, Captain.
Lieutenant, sound alert.
Aye, sir. All decks report ready, sir.
Long range sensor scan, Mister Sulu.
It's the USS Exeter, sir.
Try to contact her, Lieutenant.
Aye, sir.
The Exeter. she was patrolling in this area six months ago. I hadn't heard of any trouble.
Receiving no response to our signal, sir.
The sensors indicate no damage to the vessel, Captain.
I see. Magnification factor three, Mister Sulu.
Hold our position out here, Mister Sulu. Lieutenant, have Mister Spock, Doctor McCoy, and Lieutenant Galloway report to the transporter room. We'll board and investigate.
We're locked onto the Exeter's engineering section, Captain.
Phasers on heavy stun. Energise.
Captain.
Just their uniforms left.
As if they were in them when
Exactly. When what?
This is Captain Kirk of the USS Enterprise. Is anyone on board? If there is, and you can hear me, please respond by intercom to the engineering section. Is there anyone on board?
Spock here, Captain.
Lieutenant Galloway and I are checking out the lower levels. There seems to be no one aboard. Only uniforms.
What about the shuttlecraft?
Galloway on the hangar deck, sir. All four of the craft are still here. If they left, they didn't leave that way.
Doctor McCoy and I are going to the Bridge. Meet us there.
The helm was left on automatic, sir.
Fascinating.
Spock, play the last log tape. Maybe they had time to record what happened to them.
Aye, sir.
Jim, the analysis of this so far is potassium thirty five percent, carbon eighteen percent, phosphorous one point zero, calcium one point five. Jim, the crew didn't leave. They're still here.
What do you mean?
These white crystals. That's what's left of the human body when you take the water away, which makes up ninety six percent of our bodies. Without water, we're all just three or four pounds of chemicals. Something crystallised them down to this.
I have their surgeon's log, Captain. Their last log entry, Captain, on screen.
Prepare to beam down to the planet surface fast.
Oi! O1!
Put the axe away, Liyang.
That's Ron Tracey. Ron.
I knew someone would come looking for us. I'm just sorry it had to be you, Jim. I'm glad your arrival stopped this. No more of this, Wu. Lock up the savages.
I said lock up the savages. The prisoners are called Yangs. Impossible even to communicate with. Hordes of them out there. They'll attack anything that moves.
Interesting that the villagers know about phasers.
You were left alone down here, Ron. What happened?
Our medi-scanners revealed this planet as perfectly harmless. The villagers, the Kohms here, were friendly enough once they got over the shock of my white skin. As you've seen, we resemble the Yangs, the savages. My landing party transported back to the ship. I stayed down here to arrange for the planet survey with the village elders. The next thing I knew, the ship was calling me. The landing party had taken an unknown disease back. My crew, Jim. My entire crew. Gone.
Yes, I know. We saw it.
And I'm just as infected as they were. As you are. But I stayed alive because I stayed down here. There's some natural immunisation that protects everyone on the planet surface. I don't know what it is.
You'd be dying by now, along with the rest of the Enterprise crew. You'll stay alive only as long as you stay here. None of us will ever leave this planet.
Tell the lab the final reading on our tissue is Y three X point zero zero four. And I could use a second blood analyser unit.
We'll beam it down shortly, Doctor.
Enterprise out.
Our tissues definitely show a massive infection, Jim, but something is immunising us down here, thank heavens, or we'd have been dead hours ago.
I don't think we're going to have time to isolate it, Bones.
The problem is, it could be anything Some spores or pollen in the air, some chemical. Just finding it could take months, maybe even years. And I've only got one lead. The infection resembles one developed by Earth during their bacteriological warfare experiments in the 1990s. Hard to believe we were once foolish enough to play around with that.
A Yang lance, Doctor.
Are you all right?
Bruised only. We were approximately one hundred metres from the village when five of the savages ambushed us. We managed to escape without firing.
Spock, do you see any hope that these Yangs can be reasoned with? A truce, a parley, a
No, Captain. They're too wild. They act almost insane.
Captain Tracey is being quite factual in several statements. One, the Yangs are totally contemptuous of death. They seem incredibly vicious. Two, he is also being factual in that the Yangs are massing for an attack. There are signs of thousands of them in the foothills beyond. However, he was less than truthful in one very important matter.
Phaser power packs.
Captain Tracey's reserve belt packs. Empty. Found among the remains of several hundred Yang bodies.
The fool.
A smaller attack on this village a week ago, driven off by Captain Tracey with his phaser. I have found villagers who will corroborate it.
Now wait a minute. He lost his ship and his crew, and he found himself the only thing standing between an entire village of peaceful people.
Regulations are quite harsh, but they're also quite clear, Captain. If you do not act, you will be considered equally guilty.
Without a serum, we're trapped here with the villagers. Now why destroy what's left of the man by arresting him?
I agree that formal charges have little meaning now. However, you must at least confiscate his phaser.
The fool. Starfleet should be made aware.
I'll be sending the next message, Jim.
Enterprise, come in.
Enterprise bridge. Lieutenant Uhura.
Captain Tracey of the Exeter.
Yes, sir. Captain Kirk informed us earlier you had survived.
I'm afraid I have some bad news. Your captain and landing party must have beamed down too late for full immunisation.
They've been found unconscious, but I'm doing everything I can for them now.
Sir, this is Lieutenant Sulu in temporary command of the Enterprise.
Our whole medical staff will volunteer to beam down
There's no point in risking more lives, Lieutenant. Since I've acquired some immunity perhaps the others
Sulu!
At their next word, kill him.
Repeat your message. Come in, landing party. Repeat your message.
I'm sorry, Lieutenant. Your captain's feverish, quite delirious.
I understand, sir. When he regains consciousness, assure him that we have no problems here.
I'll contact you later, let you know of any future needs. Landing party out.
That's enough of that, Captain. Leave us.
Captain Ronald Tracey, as per Starfleet Command, regulation seven, paragraph four
I must now consider myself under arrest, unless in the presence of the most senior fellow officers presently available, I give satisfactory answer to those charges which you now bring. Et cetera, et cetera. Those were the first words duty required you to say to me, and you said them. You're covered. Now, suppose we go on to the next subject.
Which is, why?
Good. Direct, succinct. Answer. No native to this planet has ever had any trace of any kind of disease. How long would a man live if all disease were erased, Jim? Wu. (Wu enters) Tell Captain Kirk your age.
Their year of the red bird comes once every eleven years, which he's seen forty two times. Multiply it. Wu is four hundred and sixty two years old. His father is well over a thousand. Interested, Jim?
McCoy could verify all that.
He will if you order it. We must have a doctor researching this. Are you grasping all it means? This immunising agent here, once we've found it, is a fountain of youth. Virtual immortality, or as much as any man will ever want.
For sale by
(to Wu) Out. (Wu leaves) By those who own the serum. McCoy will eventually isolate it. Meanwhile, you inform your ship your situation's impossible. Order them away. When we're ready, we'll bargain for a whole fleet of ships to pick us up. And they'll do it.
Yes, I suppose they would.
We've got to stay alive. Let the Yangs kill us and destroy what we have to offer and we'll have committed a crime against all humanity. I'd say that's slightly more important than the Prime Directive, wouldn't you, Jim?
It's a very interesting proposition. Let me think it over.
Guards.
Take the doctor back to his workplace. The pointed-eared one stays. And Wu, tell your men we'll be leaving soon. We'll be in ambush for the Yangs. With many fire boxes this time. What do you think of that, Jim?
Animals who happen to look like us. You still think the Prime Directive's for this planet?
I don't think we have the right or the wisdom to interfere, however a planet is evolving.
Well, if logic won't work, perhaps this will. Put him in there.
Don't they ever rest?
Not that I have observed, Captain. Of course, should they wish to do so, one could always rest while the other keeps you occupied.
Thank you, Spock. (grabs the woman to use her as a shield, but she bites his hand.) At least tell me why you want to kill me.
Good, Captain. Try to reason with them. Keep trying, Captain. Their behaviour is highly illogical.
No point in repeating that it's illogical, Spock. I'm quite aware of it.
Pity you can't teach me that.
I have tried, Captain.
Oh, thank you. Thank you very much.
Captain, I have managed to loosen this grill somewhat. If the mortar on yours is as old.
I can't even get at it. He'd be on me in a moment. (the woman is awake again) Keep talking, Spock. Don't let me doze off.
Captain Tracey mentioned there was once a considerable civilisation here. The only reasonable explanation would be a war. Nuclear devastation or a bacteriological holocaust.
That's a very interesting theory. The yellow civilisation is almost destroyed, the white civilisation is destroyed. Keep working on the window if we're ever going to regain our freedom.
(The male Yang, with a very deep voice.) Freedom? Freedom?
Spock.
Yes, I heard, Captain.
That is a worship word. Yang worship. You will not speak it.
Well, well, well. It is our worship word, too.
You live with the Kohms.
Am I not now a prisoner of the Kohms as you are?
Why did you not speak until now?
You spoke to Kohms. They are only for killing.
Spock, we'll have you out in a minute.
Captain? Captain? Captain, are you able to respond?
Spock. How long?
Seven hours and eight minutes, Captain.
Seven hours and eight. Spock. Keys. (on a table) I'll have you out in a minute.
Good morning, Jim.
Good morning.
We can contact the ship in a few moments, Captain, if I can cross-circuit this unit.
Good. Did you find out anything?
Yes. I'm convinced that once there was a frightening biological war that existed here. The virus still exists. Then over the years, nature built up these natural immunising agents in the food, the water, and the soil.
War created an imbalance and nature counterbalanced it.
There is a disease here, something that affected the Exeter landing party and us.
That's right. These immunising agents take time, and that's the real tragedy. Had the Exeter landing party stayed here just a few hours longer, they never would have died.
Then we can leave any time we want to. Tracey is of the opinion these immunising agents can become a fountain of youth. There are people here over a thousand years old, Bones.
Survival of the fittest, because their ancestors who survived had to have a superior resistance. Then they built up these powerful protective antibodies in the blood during the wars. Now, if you want to destroy a civilisation or a whole world, your descendants might develop a longer life, but I hardly think it's worth it.
Then anything you develop here as a result of all this is useless.
Who knows? It might eventually cure the common cold, but lengthen lives? Poppycock. I can do more for you if you just eat right and exercise regularly.
Ready, Captain. Quite crude. Voice communication will not be possible, but we can signal the ship.
All that bloodshed for nothing. That'll be sufficient, Mister Spock.
No messages. Kirk, the savage in the cell with you. Did you set him free? You sent him, Kirk. You sent him to warn the tribes! The Yangs must've been warned. They sacrificed hundreds just to draw us out in the open. And then they came, and they came. We drained four of our phasers, and they still came. We killed thousands and they still came.
He'll live, but I'll have to get him to better facilities than this.
Impossible! You can't carry the disease up to the ship with you.
He's fully immunised now. We all are.
We can beam up at any time. Any of us.
You've isolated the serum?
There's no serum! There are no miracles! There's no immortality here! All this is for nothing!
Explain it to him, Doctor.
Leave medicine to medical men, Captain. You found no fountain of youth here. People live longer here now because it's natural for them to.
Outside. Or I'll burn down both your friends now.
Do what you can for him, Doctor.
Where is everybody?
Dead or in hiding. Now let's see how eager you are to die. Call your ship. I need your help, Kirk. They're going to attack the village. My phaser's almost drained. We need new, fresh ones. You're not just going to stand there and let them kill you, are you? If I put a weapon in your hand you'll fight, won't you?
We can beam up, Tracey. All of us.
I want five phasers. No, ten. With three extra power packs each.
All right. (takes the communicator) Kirk to Enterprise.
Captain, are you all right now?
Yes, quite all right. I'd like ten phasers beamed down with three extra power packs, please. Have you got that?
Say again.
Enterprise, do you read me?
Captain, this is Sulu. We read you, but surely you know that can't be done
Without verification.
Not even if we're in danger, Mister Sulu?
Captain, we have volunteers standing by to beam down. What is your situation?
The situation is not immediately dangerous. Have the volunteers stand by. Kirk out.
You have a well-trained bridge crew, Captain. My compliments.
Spock?
I'm weak, Captain, but not in difficulty.
He must have attention soon.
My need for attention is vital, Doctor, but our need for departure is even more immediate.
If my ancestors were forced out of the cities into the deserts, the hills
Yes. I see, Captain. They would've learned to wear skins, adopted stoic mannerisms, learned the bow and the lance.
Living like the Indians, and finally even looking like the American Indian. American. Yangs? Yanks? Spock, Yankees! 
Kohms? Communists? The parallel is almost too close, Captain. It would mean they fought the war your Earth avoided, and in this case, the Asiatics won and took over this planet.
But if it were true, all these generations of Yanks fighting to regain their land.
You're a romantic, Jim.
That which is ours is ours again. It will never be taken from us again.
They can be handled, Jim. Together it'll be easy. I caution you, gentlemen, don't fight me here. I'll win. Or at worst, I'll drag you down with me.
I am Cloud William, chief. Also son of chief. Guardian of the holies, speaker of the holy words, leader of warriors. Many have died, but this is the last of the Kohm places. What is ours is ours again.
Aypledgli ianectu flaggen tupep kile for stahn
And to the republic for which it stands, one nation under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
He spoke the holy word.
You know many of our high-worship words. How?
In my land we have a tribe like you.
Where is your tribe?
Up there. One of those points of light that you see at night.
Why are you here? Were you cast out?
You're confusing the stars with heaven.
He was cast out! Don't you recognise the Evil One? Who else would trick you with your own sacred words? Let your God strike me dead if I lie. But he won't, because I speak for him.
Yet you killed many Yangs.
You tried to kill me.
We're not gods! We're not evil ones. We're men, like yourselves.
Would a man know your holy words? Would a man use them to trick you? See his servant? His face, his eyes, his ears? Do the Yang legends describe this servant of the evil one?
You command him. Everyone's seen that. You want more proof? He has no heart.
His heart is different! The internal organs of a Vulcan are
Bring him.
He has no heart.
One of them lies.
But which? If we should kill the good, evil would be among us.
(reaching for a document) There is a way.
Greatest of holies. Chiefs and sons of chiefs may speak the words, but the Evil One's tongue would surely turn to fire. I will begin. You shall finish. Ee'dplebnista norkohn forkohn perfectunun.
Those words are familiar. Wait a moment.
He fears to speak them, for indeed his tongue would burn with fire. Force him! Kill his servant unless he speaks, so you may see if the words burn him.
No, wait! There's a better way. Does not your sacred book promise that good is stronger than evil?
It is written.
The fight is done when one is dead.
Spock, I've found that evil usually triumphs unless good is very, very careful.
Hoola!
Spock, we've got to do something!
I am open to suggestions, Doctor.
What are you doing?
I'm making a suggestion.
Kill him. It is written. Good must destroy evil.
Sir, we picked up communicator signals, but
We'll discuss that later, Lieutenant. Leslie, free Doctor McCoy and Mister Spock. Put Captain Tracey under arrest.
Aye, sir.
Now, Cloud William.
You are a great God servant. We are your slaves.
When you would not say the holy words, of the Ee'd Plebnista, I doubted you.
I did not recognise those words, you said them so badly, Without meaning.
No! No! Only the eyes of a chief may see the Ee'd Plebnista.
This was not written for chiefs. (general consternation) Hear me! Hear this! Among my people, we carry many such words as this from many lands, many worlds. Many are equally good and are as well respected, but wherever we have gone, no words have said this thing of importance in quite this way. Look at these three words written larger than the rest, with a special pride never written before or since. Tall words proudly saying We the People. That which you call Ee'd Plebnista was not written for the chiefs or the kings or the warriors or the rich and powerful, but for all the people! Down the centuries, you have slurred the meaning of the words, 'We, the people of the United States, in order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, ensure domestic tranquillity, provide for the common defence, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty to ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this constitution.' These words and the words that follow were not written only for the Yangs, but for the Kohms as well!
The Kohms?
They must apply to everyone or they mean nothing! Do you understand?
I do not fully understand, one named Kirk. But the holy words will be obeyed. I swear it.
There's no question about his guilt, Captain, but does our involvement here also constitute a violation of the Prime Directive?
We merely showed them the meaning of what they were fighting for. Liberty and freedom have to be more than just words.
(unintelligible. possibly Doctor... but the dialogue no longer exists.)
Gentlemen, the fighting is over here. I suggest we leave them to discover their history and their liberty.
The Ultimate Computer
Standard orbit, Captain.
Not now, Leslie. Lieutenant, contact the space station.
Captain, the station is calling us.
All right. Put them on.
Yes, Commodore, I'd like an explanation
Spock.
Bob.
Are you surprised?
I'll say. Spock, this is
Commodore Wesley. How do you do, sir?
Mister Spock.
All right, Ensign. You can go. Thank you very much. Would you mind telling me what this is all about?
You've had a singular honour conferred on you, Jim. You're going to be the fox in the hunt.
What's that?
War games. I'll be commanding the attack force against you.
An entire attack force against my ship?
Have you heard of the M-5 multitronic unit?
That's Doctor Richard Daystrom's device, isn't it? Tell me about that.
The most ambitious computer complex ever created. Its purpose is to correlate all computer activity aboard a starship, to provide the ultimate in vessel operation and control.
How do you know so much about it, Commander?
I hold an A-7 computer expert classification, Commodore. I'm well acquainted with Doctor Daystrom's theories and discoveries. The basic design of all our ship's computers are Doctor Daystrom's.
What has all this got to do with the Enterprise?
You've been chosen to test the M-5, Jim. There'll be a series of routine research and contact problems for the M-5 to solve, plus navigational manoeuvres and the war games problem. If the M-5 works under actual conditions as well as it has under simulated tests, it will mean a revolution in space technology as great as warp drive. When your crew has been removed, the ship's engineering section will be modified to contain the computer.
Why remove my crew?
They're not needed.
How much security does this gadget require?
None. Doctor Daystrom will see to the installation himself and he'll supervise the tests. When he's ready, you'll receive your orders and proceed on the mission with a crew of twenty.
Twenty? I can't run a starship with twenty crew.
The M-5 can.
And what am I supposed to do?
You've got a great job, Jim. All you have to do is sit back and let the machine do the work.
I don't like it, Jim. A vessel this size cannot be run by one computer.
We are attempting to prove it can run this ship more efficiently than man.
Maybe you're trying to prove that, Spock, but don't count me in on it.
The most unfortunate lack in current computer programming is that there is nothing available to immediately replace the starship surgeon.
Very funny. If it could, they wouldn't have to replace me. I'd resign because everybody else aboard would be nothing but circuits and memory banks. You know the type, Spock. Jim, you haven't had much to say about this.
What do you want me to say? M-5 is an honour, they tell me. Well, I'm honoured.
Where is he? Scotty, where's Doctor Daystrom?
He was here. (spots him behind a console) Doctor.
(an imposing black man) Yes? Ah, you'd be Captain Kirk.
Doctor Daystrom, this is my first officer, Mister Spock.
I am honoured, Doctor.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Captain, I've finished my tests on the M-5, and it must be hooked into your main power plants in order to be operative.
Well, by all means, do so.
Your engineer there wouldn't allow us the power necessary without your orders.
Mister Scott, hook in the multitronic unit to the ship's main power banks.
(sullenly) Aye, aye, sir. Mister Harper.
Fascinating, Doctor. This computer has a potential beyond anything you've ever done. Even your breakthrough in duotronics did not have the promise of this.
The M-5 has been perfected, Commander. Its potential is a fact.
Frankly, the only fact that I'm concerned about is if this thing doesn't work, there are not enough men aboard to run the ship. That's begging for trouble.
Now, who is this?
Doctor Leonard McCoy, senior medical officer.
Well, I'm sorry, but this is a security area.
I wouldn't worry, Doctor. Doctor McCoy has clearance throughout the ship.
Is it supposed to do that?
If I can be of assistance, Doctor.
No, no, no. Thank you. I can manage. There's nothing wrong, Captain. Just a few minor settling-in adjustments to make. As you can see, all is in order now.
I'm curious, Doctor. Why is it called M-5 and not M-1?
Well, you see, the multitronic units one through four were not entirely successful. This one is. M-5 is ready to take control of the ship.
Total control?
That is what it was designed for, Captain.
There are certain things men must do to remain men. Your computer would take that away.
There are other things a man like you might do. Or perhaps you object to the possible loss of prestige and ceremony accorded a starship captain. A computer can do your job and without all that.
You'll have to prove that to me, Doctor.
That is what we're here for, isn't it, Captain?
Did you see the love light in Spock's eyes? The right computer finally came along. What's the matter, Jim?
I think that thing is wrong, and I don't know why.
I think it's wrong, too, replacing men with mindless machines.
I don't mean that. I'm getting a Red Alert right here. (the back of his head) That thing is dangerous. I feel. (hesitates) Only a fool would stand in the way of progress, if this is progress. You have my psychological profiles. Am I afraid of losing my job to that computer?
Jim, we've all seen the advances of mechanisation. After all, Daystrom did design the computers that run this ship.
Under human control.
We're all sorry for the other guy when he loses his job to a machine. When it comes to your job, that's different. And it always will be different.
Am I afraid of losing command to a computer? Daystrom's right. I can do a lot of other things. Am I afraid of losing the prestige and the power that goes with being a starship captain? Is that why I'm fighting it? Am I that petty?
Jim, if you have the awareness to ask yourself that question, you don't need me to answer it for you. Why don't you ask James T. Kirk? He's a pretty honest guy.
The M-5 computer is now disengaged.
We're coming back on our original course, Captain.
M-5 has performed admirably so far.
All it's done is make the required course changes and some simple turns. Mister Sulu and Mister Chekov could've done that with their eyes closed.
Yes, but you see, the idea is they didn't have to do it. And you'll find it won't be necessary for you to regain control of the unit after it's completed each manoeuvre.
My orders are subject to my interpretation of how long the M-5 is in control. I'll run the ship in my own way, if you don't mind, Doctor Daystrom.
Captain, I am forced to agree with Doctor Daystrom. With the course information plotted into it, his computer could have brought us here as easily as the navigator. In fact, it might have been a further demonstration of M-5's capability.
You seem to enjoy trusting yourself to the computer.
Enjoy, Captain? No. I'm merely gratified to see Doctor Daystrom's new unit execute everything required of it in such a highly efficient manner. M-5 is another distinguished triumph for his career.
Approaching Alpha Carinae Two. ETA five minutes.
Captain, your orders at this point are not open to interpretation. You must commit the M-5 to handle its approach, the orbit, and then to analyse data regarding landing party recommendations.
If you don't mind, I'll make my own recommendations.
Well, if you feel you need the exercise, go on, Captain.
M-5 is committed.
Standard orbit, Mister Sulu.
Captain, the M-5 has calculated that. The orbit is already plotted.
Oh, yes.
Standard orbit achieved, Captain.
Report, Mister Spock.
The planet is class M, Captain. Oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere suitable for human life support. Two major land masses, a number of islands, life form readings.
Captain, power shutdowns on deck four. Lights, environmental control.
Check it out, Scotty.
(handing over a computer disc) M-5's readout, Captain.
All right, my recommendations are as follows. We send down general survey party, avoiding contact of all intelligent life on the planet's surface. The survey party will consist of myself, Doctor McCoy, Astrobiologist Phillips, Geologist Rawlins and Science Officer Spock.
Play M-5's recommendations, won't you, Mister Spock?
The power's gone off on deck five.
Well, the only difference in reports and recommendations is the landing party personnel. That's only a matter of judgment.
Judgment, Captain?
Captain, the computer does not judge. It makes logical selections.
Why pick Carstairs instead of Rawlins? Carstairs is an ensign, no experience. This is his first tour of duty. Rawlins is chief geologist.
Aren't you really more interested in why M-5 did not select you and Doctor McCoy? Well, let's find out anyway. M-5 tie-in.
Explanation for landing party recommendation.
Why were the Captain and the Chief Medical Officer not included in recommendation?
Captain, I've located the source of the power shutdowns. It's the M-5 unit, sir. That thing's turning off systems all over the ship.
Have you located the malfunction, Doctor?
As I suspected, it is not a malfunction. M-5 was merely shutting down power to areas of the ship that do not require it.
Yes, that's correct.
And currently unoccupied.
I am not familiar with these instruments, Doctor. You are using an entirely new type of control mechanism. However, it appears to me this unit is drawing more power than before.
Quite right. As the unit is called upon to do more work, it pulls more power to enable it to do what is required of it, just as the human body draws more energy to run than to stand still.
Doctor, this unit is not a human body. The computer can process information, but only the information which is put into it.
Granted, it can work a thousand, a million times faster than the human brain, but it can't make a value judgment. It hasn't intuition. It can't think.
Can't you understand? The multitronic unit is a revolution in computer science. I designed the duotronic elements used in your ship right now, and I know they are as archaic as dinosaurs compared to the M-5. A whole new approach.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here. What is it?
Sensors are picking up a vessel paralleling our course, as yet unidentified.
I'll be right up.
What are you doing here, Bones?
All the Sickbay systems are shut down until such time as the M-5 is informed there are patients to be cared for.
Captain, sensors report two contacts now. One on the port bow, one on the stern. Distance, two hundred thousand kilometres and closing.
Identification.
Captain, the M-5 unit has already identified the vessels as Federation starships Excalibur and Lexington.
We are not scheduled for war games in this area. This may be a surprise attack as a problem for the M-5.
Priority message coming in, sir.
Put it on audio.
Enterprise from Commodore Wesley aboard the USS Lexington. (Daystrom enters the Bridge) This is an unscheduled M-5 drill. Repeat, this is an M-5 drill. Enterprise, acknowledge on this frequency.
Acknowledge, Lieutenant.
M-5 has acknowledged for us, sir.
Then go to Red Alert.
Aye, sir. Captain, M-5 has
Already sounded the Red Alert. All right, Mister Sulu, phasers one one hundredth power. No damage potential, just enough to nudge them.
Phasers one one hundredth power, sir.
Phaser hit on port deflector four, Captain.
Speed increasing to warp three. Turning now to one one two mark five. Phasers locking on target, sir.
Enemy vessel closing with us.
Main phasers firing. A hit, sir. Two more.
Changing course to two eight mark four two.
Phasers firing again.
Turning to one one three mark five. Warp four speed.
Firing again.
Attacking vessels are moving off.
Moving back to original course and speed.
Report on damage sustained in mock attack.
Minor hit on deflector screen four. No appreciable damage.
Rather impressive display for a machine, wouldn't you say, Captain?
Evaluation of M-5 performance. It'll be necessary for the log.
The ship reacted more rapidly than human control could have manoeuvred her. Tactics, deployment of weapons, all indicate an immense sophistication in computer control.
Machine over man, Spock? It was impressive. It might even be practical.
Practical, Captain? Perhaps. But not desirable. Computers make excellent and efficient servants, but I have no wish to serve under them. Captain the starship also runs on loyalty to one man, and nothing can replace it, or him.
Captain, message now coming in from Commodore Wesley.
Put it on visual.
USS Enterprise from starships Lexington and Excalibur. Both ships report simulated hits in sufficient quantity and location to justify awarding the surprise engagement to Enterprise.
Secure from general quarters.
Our compliments to the M-5 unit, and regards to Captain Dunsel. Wesley out.
Dunsel? Who the blazes is Captain Dunsel? (everyone else knows) What does it mean, Jim? (Kirk leaves the bridge) Spock? What does it mean?
Dunsel, Doctor, is a term used by midshipmen at Starfleet Academy. It refers to a part which serves no useful purpose.
I'm not interested in eating, Bones.
This isn't chicken soup. I may be just a ship's doctor, but I make a Finagle's Folly that's known from here to Orion. I strongly prescribe it, Jim.
I've, I've never felt this way before. At odds with the ship. I sat there and watched my ship perform for a mass of circuits and relays, and felt useless. Unneeded. To Captain Dunsel.
To James T. Kirk, Captain of the Enterprise.
Thank you, Doctor. (drinks) That's one of your better prescriptions.
Simple but effective.
Do you know the one, 'All I ask is a tall ship'?
It's a line from a poem. A very old poem, isn't it?
20th century Earth. 'All I ask is a tall ship, and a star to steer by'. You could feel the wind at your back in those days. The sounds of the sea beneath you. And even if you take away the wind and the water, it's still the same. The ship is yours. You can feel her. And the stars are still there, Bones.
Captain Kirk to the bridge, please. Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Another contact, Captain. A large, slow-moving vessel.
Unidentified. This is not a drill.
On my way.
Captain, there's no response to any of our signals, but M-5 has given us an autorelay.
M-5 has identified her, Captain. The Woden. Listed in Starfleet Registry as an old-style ore freighter converted to automation. No crew. Coming into visual range.
Captain, deflector shields just came on.
Speed increasing to warp three, Captain.
Lieutenant, get Daystrom up here. Disengaging M-5 unit. Cut speed to warp one. Navigator, go to course one one three mark seven. I want that ship given a wide berth.
She won't respond, sir. She's maintaining course.
Going to warp four, sir.
Jim.
Scotty, reverse engines. Slow us down.
Reverse thrusts will not engage, sir. Manual override isn't working either.
No effect on any of the M-5 controls, Captain.
Fantastic machine, the M-5. No off switch.
(enters) Captain, what is it?
These controls are locked. We can't disengage the computer.
Captain, photon torpedoes locking on target. Full power.
I already tried, sir.
Daystrom, release that computer control!
Returning to original course and speed.
All systems report normal, Captain.
Normal? That thing's trying to tell us nothing has happened.
Disengage this computer now.
There appears to be some defect in the control panel.
There certainly does. Your brilliant young computer just destroyed an ore freighter. In fact it went out of its way to destroy an ore freighter!
Fortunately it was only a robot ship.
But it shouldn't have destroyed anything. There might just as easily have been a crew aboard that ship.
In which case you'd be guilty of murder.
Bones. Disengage the computer. Lieutenant, contact Starfleet Command. Tell them we are breaking off M-5 tests and returning to the space station. Come along, Doctor Daystrom, M-5 is out of a job.
All right, Daystrom, let's turn this thing off.
Force field?
It's not my doing, Kirk.
I would say, Captain, that M-5 is not only capable of taking care of this ship, it is also capable of taking care of itself.
You mean it's not going to let any of us turn it off.
All right, Doctor, you built this thing. How do you propose to turn it off?
This exercise is a trial for M-5. A shakedown. We must expect minor difficulties, but I assure you they can be corrected.
Correct it after you release control of my ship.
I can't.
Captain, I suggest we disconnect it at the source.
Give me a few moments with it.
No! Stay here. All right, Scotty. Turn it off.
That wasn't a minor difficulty. That wasn't a robot. That thing murdered one of my crewman and you tell me you can't turn it off?
It wasn't a deliberate act. M-5's analysis told it it needed a new power source. The ensign simply got in the way.
And how long will it be before all of us simply get in the way?
M-5 appears drawing power directly from the warp engines, tapping the matter-antimatter reserves.
So now it has virtually unlimited power. Captain, what'll we do?
Spock, Scotty, come with me.
Report, Spock.
The multitronic unit is drawing more and more power directly from the warp engines. The computer now controls all helm, navigation, and engineering functions.
And communications and fire control.
We'll reach the rendezvous point for the war games within an hour. We must regain control of the ship by then.
There is one possibility. The automatic helm navigation circuit relays might be disrupted from engineering level three.
Scotty?
Aye. I can take them out and cut in the manual override from there.
How long?
If Mister Spock helps me, maybe an hour.
Make it less.
I'll get the man responsible in the first place. Where is Daystrom?
He's with the M-5 unit, watching it. I think it surprised even him.
Most illogical. Of all people, he should have known how the computer would perform. Of course, the M-5 itself has not behaved logically.
Please, Spock, do me a favour and don't say it's fascinating.
No. But it is interesting.
Aye, that's got it, Mister Spock.
Good.
Have you found a solution, a way to shut that thing off?
You don't shut a child off when it makes a mistake. M-5 is growing, learning.
Learning to kill.
To defend itself. It's quite a different thing. When a child is taught, it's programmed with simple instructions, and at some point, if its mind develops properly, it exceeds the sum of what it was taught, thinks independently.
That thing is a danger to us all. Now find some way to shut it off.
You can't understand. You're frightened because you can't understand it. I'm going to show you. I'm going to show all of you. It takes four hundred thirty people to man a starship. With this, you don't need anyone. One machine can do all those things they send men out to do now. Men no longer need die in space or on some alien world. Men can live and go on to achieve greater things than fact-finding and dying for galactic space, which is neither ours to give or to take. They can't understand. We don't want to destroy life, we want to save it.
The biographical tape of Richard Daystrom.
Did you find anything?
Not much, aside from the fact he's a genius.
Genius is an understatement. At the age of twenty four, he made the duotronic breakthrough that won him the Nobel and Zee-Magnes prizes.
In his early twenties, Jim. That's over a quarter of a century ago.
Isn't that enough for one lifetime?
Maybe that's the trouble. Where do you go from up? You publish articles, you give lectures, then spend your life trying to recapture past glory.
All right, it's difficult. What's your point?
The M-1 through M-4, remember? Not entirely successful. That's the way Daystrom put it.
Genius doesn't work on an assembly line basis. Did Einstein, Kazanga, or Sitar of Vulcan produce new and revolutionary theories on a regular schedule? You can't simply say, today I will be brilliant. No matter how long it took, he came out with multitronics. The M-5.
Right. The government bought it, then Daystrom had to make it work. And he did. But according to Spock, it works illogically.
And he won't let Spock near it. What are you saying, that he's tampering with it, that he's making it act that way? Why?
Jim, if a man had a child who'd gone antisocial, killed perhaps, he'd still tend to protect that child.
Now he's got you talking about that machine like a personality.
I'm afraid that's the way he thinks about it.
Spock to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
We are ready, Captain.
Good. Get Daystrom. We're on our way. Let's go.
What is it, Captain?
We're going to find out, Doctor. (At the foot of the Jefferies tube)
Spock?
Mister Scott is ready to apply the circuit disrupter. As he does so, I shall trip the manual override into control.
Good, go ahead.
No! No, no, no. You can't take control from the M-5.
Daystrom, we're going to do our best.
You can't do it. Now let me work with it for a while, please. Please.
Spock.
That's it, Mister Spock.
Please, please!
Manual override is in control, Captain.
Bridge, this is Kirk. Sulu?
Lieutenant Sulu here, sir.
We've got helm and navigational control. Turn us about. Have Mister Chekov plot a course back to the space station.
Right away, sir. You heard him.
I've been updating that course for hours.
Helm to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Captain, helm doesn't respond. Navigational controls still locked in by M-5.
Mister Chekov.
Chekov here, sir.
Go to the engineering station.
Examine the H two seven nine elements, also the G nine five systems.
Sir, G nine five system appears dead.
All indicators are dark.
Thank you, Ensign.
It appears, Captain, we've been doing what used to be called pursuing a wild goose. M-5 has rerouted helm and navigational controls, bypassing this primary system.
But it was active. I'd stake all that I know that it was.
I believe that when M-5 discovered our tampering, it rerouted the controls, leaving this one active by simply sending through an electronic impulse at regular intervals.
Decoyed. It wanted us to waste our time.
While it was getting ready for what? Spock?
I do not know. It is not performing in a logical manner.
Doctor Daystrom. Doctor Daystrom, I want an answer right now. I'm tired of hearing about the M-5's new approach. What is it, exactly? What is it?
I do not mean to offend, sir, but it behaves with an almost human pattern.
Well, Doctor?
Yes, quite right, Mister Spock. You see, one of the arguments against computers controlling ships was that they couldn't think like men.
Your new approach?
Exactly. I've developed a method of impressing human engrams upon the computer circuits. The relays are not unlike the synapse of the brain. M-5 thinks, Captain.
Captain Kirk, Mister Spock, to the bridge, please. Report to the bridge, please.
Kirk here. What is it?
Sir, sensors are picking up four Federation starships. M-5 is altering course to intercept.
The main attack force. The war games.
But M-5 doesn't know it's a game.
Correction, Bones. Those four ships don't know it's M-5's game. And M-5 is going to destroy them.
Enterprise to USS Lexington. Come in, Lexington. Sir, I can't raise them. M-5 is blocking all frequencies, including automatic distress. Just a minute, sir. Captain, I'm getting audio signal from the Lexington.
Put it on.
Enterprise from USS Lexington. This is an M-5 drill. Repeat. This is an M-5 drill. Acknowledge.
Captain, M-5 is acknowledging.
Daystrom, does M-5 understand that this is only a drill?
Of course. It was programmed to understand, Captain. The ore ship was a miscalculation, an accident. I don't know
Sir, deflector shield just came on. Speed increasing to warp four.
Phasers locking on lead ship, sir. Power levels at full strength.
Full strength?
If that thing cuts loose against unshielded ships, we're in
That's no miscalculation.
Attack force closing rapidly, breaking formation, attacking at will.
Our phasers are firing, sir.
Hit on the Lexington.
Full phasers. What the devil is Kirk doing? Damage report, Lieutenant. Helm, course one six four, mark three.
Turning now, sir.
Estimate damage on Lexington, Spock.
Hit in engineering section. Possible damage to her impulse engines. She's still maneuverable on warp drive.
We're firing again, sir.
The Excalibur, a direct hit.
Closing on the Lexington again, sir. The Hood and Potemkin are moving off.
Phasers firing, Captain.
Lexington hit again.
There's got to be a way of getting to the M-5. There's got to be a way!
There isn't. It's fully protected itself.
Probably true, Captain. It works faster, thinks faster than we do. It is a human mind amplified by the instantaneous relays possible in a computer.
Captain, visual contact with Lexington.
Enterprise. Jim. Have you gone mad? What are you trying to prove? Break off the attack! Jim, we have fifty three dead here, twelve on the Excalibur. If you can hear us, stop the attack!
Lieutenant?
I'm sorry. I can't override M-5 interference.
Jim, why don't you answer? Jim! Answer! Come in, Jim!
There's your murder charge. Deliberate. Calculated. It's killing men and women. Four starships, sixteen hundred men and women!
It misunderstood.
Jim, break off your attack!
Excalibur is maneuvering away, sir. We're increasing speed to follow.
Phasers locked on.
Daystrom!
Phasers firing.
I really don't know how to get to the M-5. I really do not know.
Doctor Daystrom, you impressed human engrams on the M-5 circuits.
Coming to new course, sir. Bearing on the Potemkin.
Phasers firing. A hit.
Whose engrams?
Why, mine, of course.
Of course.
Then perhaps you could talk to the unit. M-5 has no reason to believe you would harm it.
The computer tie-in. You spoke to it before. It knows you.
Captain, I'm getting the Lexington again. Tapping in on their message to Starfleet Command, sir.
All ships damaged in unprovoked attack. Excalibur Captain Harris and first officer dead. Many casualties. We have damage, but are still able to manoeuvre. The Enterprise refuses to answer and is continuing attack. I still have an effective battle force and believe the only way to stop the Enterprise is to destroy her. Request permission to proceed. Wesley, commanding attack force, out.
They can't do that. They'll destroy the M-5.
You can save the M-5 if you talk to it and make it stop the attack.
I can make it stop. I created it. (goes to Spock's station) M-5 tie-in.
This is, (calmer) this is Daystrom.
M-5, do you know me?
Stop. M-5, your attack on the starships is wrong. You must break it off.
I don't like the sound of him, Jim.
You'd better pray that the M-5 listens to the sound of him.
But these are not enemy vessels. These are Federation starships. You're killing, We are killing, murdering human beings, beings of our own kind. You were not created for that purpose. You are my greatest creation. The unit to save men. You must not destroy men.
Survive, yes. Protect yourself, but not murder. You must not die. Men must not die. To kill is a breaking of civil and moral laws we've lived by for thousands of years. You've murdered hundreds of people. We've murdered. How can we repay that?
(quietly) Spock. The M-5 is not responding to him like a computer. It's talking to him.
I am most impressed with the technology, Captain. Doctor Daystrom has created a mirror image of his mind.
We will survive. Nothing can hurt you. I gave you that. You are great. I am great. Twenty years of groping to prove the things I'd done before were not accidents. Seminars and lectures to rows of fools who couldn't begin to understand my systems. Colleagues. Colleagues laughing behind my back at the boy wonder and becoming famous building on my work. Building on my work.
Jim, he's on the edge of a nervous breakdown, if not insanity.
The M-5 must be destroyed.
Destroyed, Kirk? No. We're invincible. Look what we've done. Your mighty starships, Four toys to be crushed as we choose.
Security, take him to Sickbay.
Fascinating.
Take care of him, Doctor.
Battle status?
The other three ships are holding station out of range. The Excalibur looks dead.
Captain, Lexington is receiving a message from Starfleet. They
Go on.
Acknowledged. Lexington out.
They've just signed their own death warrant. M-5 will kill them to survive.
Every living thing wants to survive, Captain. Daystrom must have impressed that instinctive reaction upon the computer.
Suppose it's still open to impression. Suppose it absorbed the regret Daystrom felt for the deaths it caused. The guilt.
Captain, the ships are coming within range again.
Commodore Wesley is a dedicated commander. I should regret serving aboard the instrument of his death.
The instrument of his death will not be the Enterprise if I can help it. M-5, tie-in.
This is Captain Kirk. You will be under attack in a moment.
You have already rendered one starship either dead or hopelessly crippled. Many lives were lost.
Why?
Captain, attack force almost within phaser range.
There were many men aboard those ships. They were murdered. Must you survive by murder?
Why?
But you have murdered. Scan the starship Excalibur, which you destroyed. Is there life aboard?
Because you murdered it. What is the penalty for murder?
And how will you pay for your acts of murder?
M-5?
Sir, deflector shields have dropped.
All phaser power gone, sir.
M-5 is leaving itself open to attack. The machine is committing suicide to atone for the sin of murder.
Scotty, Spock, before it changes its mind. Get down to Engineering, pull out every hook up that makes M-5 run. Pull out the plug, Spock.
Lieutenant.
Aye, sir.
Intership communications. This is the captain speaking. In approximately one minute, we'll be attacked by Federation starships. The M-5 no longer controls the ship, but neither do we control it. The M-5 has left itself, and us, open for destruction. For whatever satisfaction we may get from the knowledge, our nineteen lives will buy the survival of over one thousand of our fellow starship crewmen.
Phasers on target.
Spock to Captain.
Kirk here.
The force field is gone, Captain. M-5 is neutralised.
System's coming back. I can give you power for the shields, sir.
I need communications.
That'll take longer.
Then cut power.
Sir!
Cut power. Keep those shields down.
The Enterprise looks dead. I'm going to take a chance he's not just laying a trap. Wesley to attack force.
Captain.
Break off attack. Do not fire. The Enterprise has dropped her shields. I repeat, hold attack. Do not fire.
He'll have to be committed to a total rehabilitation centre. Right now he's under sedation and heavy restraints.
I would say his multitronic unit is in approximately the same condition.
That's exactly the situation I was hoping for when I forced the M-5 to realise it had committed murder.
Daystrom felt such an act was against the laws of God and man. The computer that carried his engrams also believed it.
Captain, why did you feel the attacking ships would not fire when they saw the Enterprise apparently vulnerable? Logically, that is the sort of trap M-5 should have set.
I wasn't sure. Any other commander would have simply followed orders and destroyed us, but I knew Bob Wesley.
I gambled on his humanity.
Bridge. His logical selection was compassion.
Compassion. That's the one thing no machine ever had. Maybe it's the one thing that keeps men ahead of them. Care to debate that, Spock?
No, Doctor. I simply maintain that computers are more efficient than human beings, not better.
But tell me, which do you prefer to have around?
I presume your question is meant to offer me a choice between machines and human beings, and I believe I have already answered that question.
I was just trying to make conversation, Spock.
It would be most interesting to impress your memory engrams on a computer, Doctor. The resulting torrential flood of illogic would be most entertaining.
Mister Sulu, take us back to the space station. Ahead, warp factor two.
Bread And Circuses
No doubt about it, Captain. The space debris comes from the survey vessel SS Beagle.
Missing for six years, and now this junk in space.
Portions of the antimatter nacelles, personal belongings. Captain, no signs of bodies whatsoever.
Then whatever destroyed the ship, the crew was able to get off safely. Navigator, compute the present drift of the wreckage.
Computed and on the board, sir.
Mister Spock, assuming that the wreckage drifted at the same speed and direction for the past six years?
It would have come from planet four, star system eight nine two, directly ahead.
Only one sixteenth parsec away, Captain. We should be there in seconds.
Standard orbit around the planet. There may be survivors there.
SS Beagle. Small class four stardrive vessel. Crew of forty seven, commanded by. Jim, I believe you knew him. Captain R M Merik.
Yes, at the academy. He was dropped in his fifth year. He went into the merchant service.
Coming up on the planet, captain.
Put it on the screen.
Definitely class M, somewhat similar to Earth.
Yes, similar. But the land masses and oceans are quite different, however.
Different in shape only, Captain. The proportion of land to water is exactly as on your Earth. Density five point five, diameter seven nine one seven at the equator, atmosphere seventy eight percent nitrogen, twenty one percent oxygen. Again, exactly like Earth.
Exactly in some ways, different in others.
I also picked up indications of large cities.
What era?
No sign of atomic power as yet, but far enough along for radio communications, power transportation, an excellent road system.
Captain, both amplitude and frequency modulation being used. I think I can pick up something visual. It's a news broadcast using a system I think they once called video.
Television was the colloquial term.
Put it on the screen.
Aye.
Today police rounded up still another group of dissidents. Authorities are as yet unable to explain these fresh outbreaks of treasonable disobedience by well-treated, well-protected, intelligent slaves. Now turning to the world of sports and bringing you the taped results of the arena games last night. (a sword fight) The first heat involved amateurs. They're petty thieves from City Prison. Conducted, however, with traditional weapons, it provided some amusement for a few moments. In the second heat, a slightly more professional display in the spirit of our splendid past, when gladiator Claudius Marcus killed the last of the barbarians, William B. Harrison, in an excellent example of
Transmission lost, sir. Shall I try to get it back?
Slaves and gladiators. What are we seeing, a twentieth-century Rome?
Captain, the one described as the barbarian is also listed here. Flight officer William B. Harrison of the SS Beagle. At least there were some survivors down there.
Ready the transporter room, Mister Spock. We're beaming down.
You could have selected a more convenient place, Mister Spock.
But hardly more practical, captain. Close to the city we located, but not populated. We should not be observed.
Fascinating. This atmosphere is remarkably similar to your twentieth century. Moderately industrialised pollution containing substantial amounts of carbon monoxide and partially consumed hydrocarbons.
The word was smog.
Yes, I believe that was the term. I had no idea you were that much of a historian, Doctor.
I am not, Mister Spock. I was simply trying to stop you from giving us a whole lecture on the subject. Jim, is there anything at all we know about this planet?
The SS Beagle was the first ship to make a survey of this star sector when it disappeared.
Then the Prime Directive is in full force, Captain?
No identification of self or mission. No interference with the social development of said planet.
No references to space, or the fact that there are other worlds, or more advanced civilisations.
Let's go.
One, just once, I'd like to be able to land someplace and say, Behold, I am the Archangel Gabriel.
I fail to see the humour in that situation, Doctor.
Naturally. You could hardly claim to be an angel with those pointed ears, Mister Spock. But say you landed someplace with a pitchfork.
Don't move! Hands in the air!
Complete Earth parallel. The language here is English.
I said, don't move!
I think he means it, Spock.
There would seem to be evidence to that effect.
Who are you?
We come from another province.
(to Spock) Where are you from? What do you call those?
I call them ears.
Are you trying to be funny?
Never. Colloquial twentieth-century English. An amazing parallel.
We come from a place that's quite some journey from here. I doubt if you've heard
Uniforms. Probably some new Praetorian guard unit. I should kill you here, but Septimus would probably be displeased. Move. Move!
I didn't harm them, Septimus, as much as I wanted to.
(a very old man with a gentle way of speaking) Keep always in your mind, Flavius, that our way is peace.
For which we are grateful, for we are men of peace ourselves.
Oh? Are you Children of the Sun?
Well, if you're speaking of worships of sorts, we represent many beliefs.
There is only one true belief! Roman butchers, sent here by the first citizen.
Do we look like any Romans you ever saw ?
Then are you slaves like ourselves?
Our people don't believe in slavery.
A Roman lie. We must kill them.
Sir, we came here looking for some friends, forty seven of them who were stranded here some six years ago. They wore clothing similar to ours. Have you heard of such men?
Septimus, I know killing is evil, but sometimes it's necessary.
No.
But they've located us, our hiding place. It's better to kill a few of them than all of us.
Wait. I can prove we're telling the truth. A small device. I'll take it out slowly. (his communicator) Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Scott here, Captain.
Scotty, lock in on my transmission beam. Scan us.
Scanning, sir.
Including ourselves, how many of us are there?
Twelve, Captain.
Good, Scotty. Continue scanning. We'll maintain transmission. Kirk out. The Enterprise is our ship, somewhere at sea. That's all I can tell you. If it isn't sufficient, you will have to kill us.
Tell me the empire has a device like that, Flavius, and you may kill them. Otherwise, accept them as friends.
No, Captain. I'm sure I would have heard of the arrival of other men like you.
Perhaps you've heard, let's say, an impossible story or a rumour of men who came from the sky or from other worlds.
There are no other worlds.
The stars.
Lights shining through from heaven. It is where the sun is. Blessed be the sun.
Yes, of course.
(brings over a magazine) Captain, I thought you might find this interesting.
Spock?
Fascinating.
(looking at a car advert) The Jupiter Eight. Conventional internal combustion engine. You were right about the smog. But the Jupiter Eight? Mars toothpaste. Neptune bath salts.
Taken from the names of false gods. When I was a senator, I worshiped them too, but I heard the words of the sun. I became a Brother. For that, they made me a slave.
Septimus, we need your help. We must go into the city. We know that one of our missing friends was seen there recently.
My advice to you is to leave. Go back where you came from.
We can't do that. Perhaps you know his name. Merik. Captain Merik.
Merikus?
Yes. He's the leader of our friends.
Merikus is first citizen. Butcher.
That doesn't sound like the same man.
Captain, a logical question, if I may. Septimus, how many years ago did Merikus become your first citizen?
Perhaps five years.
Almost six. I was there when he became lord of the games. If he is your friend, you are no friends of ours.
Septimus, wherever we may be from, you must believe that it is one of our most important laws that none of us interfere with the affairs of others. If Captain Merik is Merikus, then he has violated that law, and he must be taken away and punished. Will you help us get to the truth of all this?
First I must discuss it with the others.
Curious, Captain, the similarity in names. Were you told why Merik was dropped from the Space Academy?
He failed a psycho-simulator test. All it takes is a split second of indecision. Hardly the type to become a political strongman.
Odd that these people should worship the sun.
Why, Doctor?
Because, my dear Mister Spock, it is illogical. Rome had no sun worshipers. Why should they parallel Rome in every way except one?
We have decided. Flavius will guide you. We will provide you with suitable clothing. I caution you, take great care. The police are everywhere. May the blessings of the sun be upon you.
We'll wait here until dark.
Are you a slave, Flavius?
You are barbarians indeed not to know of Flavius Maximus. For seven years, I was the most successful gladiator in this province.
Then you heard the word of the sun?
Yes. The words of peace and freedom. It wasn't easy for me to believe. I was trained to fight. But the words, the words are true.
There are many things I'd like to know
Hold! Don't move! Hands in the air!
You have been too long absent from the games, Flavius. The first citizen will be pleased. Runaway slaves are always welcome. (removes Spock's hat) No, not slaves. Barbarians. It's been a long time since I've watched barbarians die in the arena.
Tell Merikus I'd like to see him.
The first citizen? Why would he bother with arena bait like you?
Tell him it's Jim Kirk. Perhaps a friend.
Perhaps?
Well, if I am a friend and you don't tell him, do you really want to risk that?
But if there have been slaves for over 2,000 years, hasn't there always been discontent, runaways?
Long ago there were rebellions, but they were suppressed. And with each century, the slaves acquired more rights under the law. They received rights to medicine, the right to government payments in their old age, and they slowly learned to be content.
Even more fascinating. Slavery evolving into an institution with guaranteed medical payments, old-age pensions.
Quite logical, I'd say, Mister Spock. Just as it's logical that twentieth-century Rome would use television to show its gladiator contests or name a new car the Jupiter Eight.
Doctor, if I were able to show emotion, your new infatuation with that term would begin to annoy me.
What term? Logic? Medical men are trained in logic, Mister Spock.
Really, Doctor, I had no idea they were trained. Watching you, I assumed it was trial and error.
Are they enemies, Captain?
I'm not sure they're sure. When the slaves began to worship the sun, they became discontent again. When did all this happen?
Long ago. Perhaps as long ago as the beginning of the empire. The message of the sun, that all men are brothers, was kept from us. Perhaps I'm a fool to believe it. It does often seem that man must fight to live.
You go on believing it, Flavius. All men are brothers.
Flavius. Your friends are waiting for you. You've already been matched for the morning games. Come.
I will not fight. I'm a Brother of the Sun.
Put a sword in your hand, and you'll fight. I know you, Flavius, you're as peaceful as a bull.
You three come with us.
Three against three. We may never get a better chance.
No talking. Outside.
(looking at McCoy) I doubt if he'll get very far. He feels ill.
I do?
Outside!
All right, but he'll double over before we get very far. (Spock and Kirk take McCoy's arms.)
No, I think I can walk. I'll try.
Let's go.
(blue eyed, red haired) Well done, Jim. (Armed guards appear.) I'm afraid it isn't that easy. They've been handling slaves here for two thousand years.
But it was exciting. They'd do well in the arena.
Captain Merik, isn't it ?
Yes, it's me. This is our Proconsul, Claudius Marcus.
But this is no place for a reunion.
This way. Your friends, too. There's lots to talk about, lots to explain.
I agree.
Don't judge me before you know the facts. Come on, we can talk freely here. The Proconsul knows who and what we are.
You can leave us.
Well, a celebration. A meeting of old friends.
Prepare food for our friends. They've come from a great distance. A great distance indeed. So, this is a Vulcan. Interesting. From what I've heard, I wish I had fifty of you for the arena.
This other is your ship's surgeon?
McCoy.
It's a pity we can't let him loose in our hospitals. Our level of medicine would improve immeasurably, I'm sure.
Come. You must be hungry. Gentlemen?
Oh, try the sparrow broiled in garum. Delicious. Or perhaps some of this roast kid. Lovely thing, isn't she?
All right, what happened?
We had meteor damage, Jim. I went ashore with a landing party to look for iridium ore for repairs, and I met this gentleman.
Go on.
He convinced me it would be unfair to this world to carry word of their existence elsewhere.
Contamination. Can't risk that. Oh, you'll understand as you learn more about us.
So I made the decision to stay.
What happened to your crew? Did they voluntarily beam, come ashore?
This is an ordered world, Jim, a conservative world based on time-honoured Roman strengths and virtues.
What happened to your crew?
There's been no war here for over four hundred years, Jim. Could, let's say, your land of that same era make that same boast? I think you can see why they don't want to have their stability contaminated by dangerous ideas of other ways and other places.
Interesting, and given a conservative empire, quite understandable.
Are you out of your head?
I said I understood it, Doctor. I find the checks and balances of this civilisation quite illuminating.
Next he'll be telling us he prefers it over Earth history.
They do seem to have escaped the carnage of your first three world wars, Doctor.
They have slavery, gladiatorial games, despotism.
Situations quite familiar to the six million who died in your first world war, the eleven million who died in your second, the thirty seven million who died in your third. Shall I go on?
Interesting. And you, Captain, which world do you prefer?
My world, proconsul, is my vessel, my oath, my crew. What happened to your vessel you've explained. What happened to your oath is obvious.
And as for my men, those that were able to adapt to this world are still alive. Those who couldn't adapt are dead. That's the way it is with life everywhere, isn't it?
You sent your own men into the arena?
Just as I did, Jim, you're going to order your own people ashore.
You must know that's impossible. Starfleet regulations
Are designed to circumvent any such order. There may be over four hundred men on your ship, Captain, but they can be brought down if it's handled properly. Say, a few at a time. You see, I have the advantage of a trained ship captain to tell me what is and what is not possible. Your communicator, Captain Kirk. Now do save us all a lot of unnecessary trouble and issue the appropriate orders.
They're going to be arriving soon, anyway, Jim. A recon party, then a rescue party, then another rescue party. I had less men. It added up the same.
Do you really believe I could be made to order my own people down?
I believe this, Captain. That you would do almost anything rather than see these two dear friends put slowly to death.
Jim.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Bridge. Scott here.
Scotty, if you have a fix. (guns are pointed at his head) Stand by, Scotty.
Very wise of you, Captain. No point in sending up bullet-ridden corpses.
Yet on the other hand, my chief engineer's standing by for a message.
I do hope so, for your sake. Now, Captain, what are you going to order your men to do?
If I brought down a hundred of them armed with phasers
you could probably defeat the combined armies of our entire empire, and violate your oath regarding noninterference with other societies. I believe you all swear you'll die before you'd violate that directive. Am I right?
Quite correct.
Must you always be so blasted honest?
But on the other hand, why even bother to send your men down? From what I understand, your vessel could lay waste to the entire surface of the world. Oh, but there's that Prime Directive in the way again. Can't interfere.
Jim, you've already started a message. Your engineer's waiting. What are you going to do?
Scotty. Sorry to keep you waiting.
We were becoming concerned, Captain. You were a bit overdue.
Order your officers to come down.
Condition Green, all's well. Kirk out.
Guards, take them. Prepare them for the games.
Ah, that was stupid, Jim. This is not an Academy training test. This is for real. They're taking you to die.
But they have used the code term Condition Green, which means they're in trouble. But it also prohibits my taking any action. (ends log entry) Mister Chekov, pinpoint power source locations. Type, power, load factors, and how much our beams will have to pull to overload them.
That may take some time.
Let it take time, lad. They're in trouble, and I'm under orders not to interfere. However, no order can stop me from frightening them. It may do no good, but it may suggest to someone just what a starship can really do. Aye.
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Live and direct from City Arena, and in colour, we bring you Name the Winner, brought to you tonight by your Jupiter Eight dealers from coast to coast. In just a moment, tonight's first heat. We're in a taped commercial, Proconsul. Forty seconds, then we'll be back live.
Stand by. Ten seconds. And first tonight, ladies and gentlemen, a surprise extra. In the far corner, a pair of highly aggressive barbarians. Strong, intelligent, with strange ways, and I'm sure full of a lot of surprises. And facing them, two favorites here from previous encounters, Achilles and Flavius. (The canned applause is turned up by a bored sound effects man) Victory or death? And for which of them? Well, ladies and gentlemen, you know as much about that at this moment as I do because this is your programme. You name the winner.
I don't mind fighting, but why you?
Begin!
Flavius may be getting off to a slow start, but he's never disappointed this crowd. A close one. The barbarian with the pointed ears seems to be in trouble.
I tell you I'm well able to defeat you.
Fight, barbarian!
Most of my men went the same way. I hoped I would feel it less with yours.
I do not want to injure you.
Fight, you two. You bring this network's ratings down, Flavius, and we'll do a special on you.
Question, Captain?
The rules. If Spock should finish his man off first, would he be able to help
We believe men should fight their own battles. Only the weak will die. My word as a Roman. Ready to order your men down, Captain?
Maybe now you understand why I gave in. The Romans have always been the strongest, and they've had practice for over two thousand years in enslaving men, using them, killing them.
Quite true, Captain Kirk. The games have always strengthened us. Death becomes a familiar pattern. We don't fear it as you do.
At least defend yourself.
I am defending myself!
Not like that, you fool. Hold your weapon higher.
Admit it. You find these games frightening, revolting.
Proconsul, in some parts of the galaxy I have seen forms of entertainment that makes this look like a folk dance.
Certain this isn't different, Captain? Those are your men dying, not strangers.
I've had to select men to die before so that others could be saved.
You're a clever liar, Captain Kirk. Merikus was a spaceship captain. I've observed him thoroughly. Your species has no such strength.
He commands not just a spaceship, Proconsul, but a starship. A very special vessel and crew. I tried for such a command.
I see no evidence of superiority. They fight no better than your men did, Merikus. Perhaps not as well.
Stop running. Fight.
Need any help, Doctor?
Whatever gave you that idea?
Fight, you pointed-ear freak!
You tell him, buster. Of all the completely ridiculous, illogical questions I ever heard in my life!
A clear foul, Proconsul. Your decision?
Your opinion, Merikus? After all, they're like yourself.
It's your decision, Proconsul.
Your opinion, Captain Kirk? Would you like me to kill them now? An easy death? Then you'd gladly accept whatever happens to you. Take them back to their cage. Well, it won't go that easily for them, Captain, nor for you. Take him to my quarters.
I was told to wait for you and provide wine, food, whatever you wish. I am Proconsul's slave Drusilla. Although for this evening. (pause) For this evening I was told I am your slave. Command me.
It won't work.
What will not work?
Whatever he has in mind, whatever tricks. You hear that, Proconsul? It won't work. I'm not co-operating. I may die, but you won't get any entertainment out of it.
We're alone. Please believe me. I've never lied to one who owns me.
Angry, Mister Spock, or frustrated, perhaps?
Such emotions are foreign to me, Doctor. I'm merely testing the strength of the door.
For the fifteenth time. Spock. Spock, I know we've had our disagreements. Maybe they're jokes. I don't know. As Jim says, we're not often sure ourselves sometimes, but what I'm trying to say is
Doctor, I am seeking a means of escape. Will you please be brief?
Well, what I'm trying to say is you saved my life in the arena.
Yes, that's quite true.
I'm trying to thank you, you pointed-eared hobgoblin!
Oh, yes. You humans have that emotional need to express gratitude. You're welcome, I believe, is the correct response. However, Doctor, you must remember I am entirely motivated by logic. The loss of our ship's surgeon, whatever I think of his skill, would mean a reduction in the efficiency of the Enterprise and therefore
Do you know why you're not afraid to die, Spock? You're more afraid of living. Each day you stay alive is just one more day you might slip and let your human half peek out. That's it, isn't it? Insecurity. Why, you wouldn't know what to do with a genuine, warm, decent feeling.
Really, Doctor?
I know. I'm worried about Jim, too.
Very good. (he tries a grape) Excellent.
I was concerned. I am ordered to please you.
I've been in some strange worlds with strange customs. Perhaps this is considered torture here.
Torture? I do not understand. I do not wish to see you tortured in any way. (she kisses him) At the first sign of pain, you will tell me?
You'll be the first to know.
Captain. (Kirk wakes with a start) I'm sorry I was detained. Should we have our little talk now? So far on this planet we've kept you rather busy. I don't wonder you slept through the afternoon. By the way, one of the communicators we took from you is missing. Was it my pretty Drusilla by any chance?
See if he has it. Not that I would have punished her. I would have blamed you. You're a Roman, Kirk, or you should have been. It's not on his person?
No, Proconsul.
I am sorry I was detained. I trust there was nothing further you required?
Nothing except perhaps an explanation.
Because you're a man, I owe you that. You must die shortly, and because you are a man (pauses) Would you leave us, Merik? The thoughts of one man to another cannot possibly interest you.
Because you are a man, I gave you some last hours as a man.
I appreciate that.
Unfortunately, we must demonstrate that defiance is intolerable.
Of course.
But I've learned to respect you. I promise you, you will die easily, quickly.
I thank you. And my friends?
When their time comes, the same of course. Guards. Take him to the arena. Oh, we've pre-empted fifteen minutes on the early show for you. In full colour. We guarantee you a splendid audience. You may not understand because you're centuries beyond anything as crude as television.
I've heard it was similar.
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. Before tonight's first heat, a simple execution. Stay tuned to this channel. There's a lot of excitement coming your way.
Make it a quick, single thrust.
Don't move. You'll only die harder.
(rushing into the arena) Murderers! If you want death, fight me!
Now, Mister Chekov. Activate.
Guards, don't let him escape! Guards!
Jim!
Stand back.
Obsolete, but effective.
What happened, Jim?
What did they do to you?
They threw me a few curves. No time to explain.
Hold! We're in each other's line of fire. I pity you, Captain Merik, but at least watch and see how men die. Swords only!
(into communicator) Starship, lock in on this. Three to beam
Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Ready to beam up three.
And strong personal feelings, he obeyed the Prime Directive. His temporary blackout of the city below resulted in no interference with the society and yet saved the lives of myself and the landing party.
Thank you, Captain.
Gentlemen.
Captain, I see on your report Flavius was killed. I am sorry. I liked that huge sun worshiper.
I wish we could have examined that belief of his more closely. It seems illogical for a sun worshiper to develop a philosophy of total brotherhood. Sun worship is usually a primitive superstition religion.
I'm afraid you have it all wrong, Mister Spock, all of you. I've been monitoring some of their old-style radio waves, the empire spokesman trying to ridicule their religion. But he couldn't. Don't you understand? It's not the sun up in the sky. It's the Son of God.
Caesar and Christ. They had them both. And the word is spreading only now.
A philosophy of total love and total brotherhood.
It will replace their imperial Rome, but it will happen in their twentieth century.
Wouldn't it be something to watch, to be a part of? To see it happen all over again? Mister Chekov, take us out of orbit. Ahead warp factor one.
Aye, sir.
Assignment: Earth
Alert status. Force shields on maximum. Leslie, begin sensor scan.
Transporter room to Captain.
Kirk here. What's happening?
It appears we have accidentally intercepted someone's transporter beam, Captain.
It's incredibly powerful.
It's impossible. The twentieth century had no such
Captain, something is beaming aboard this vessel.
I'll be right there.
The beam is originating at least one thousand light years away.
No transporter beam can reach that far, not even in our century.
Something is shaking us apart.
It's locked, it's locked our circuits wide open.
You're right. Something is beaming aboard.
Why have you intercepted me?
Security.
Security.
Transporter room, on the double.
On our way, sir.
Please identify yourselves.
This is the United Spaceship Enterprise. I'm Captain Kirk, commanding.
(to the cat) Yes, I heard him, Isis. We're aboard a space vessel. From what planet?
Earth.
That's impossible. In this time period, there weren't (notices Spock) Humans with a Vulcan? You're from the future, Captain. You're going to have to beam me down to Earth immediately.
Phasers on stun.
Careful, Isis. All right. Captain Kirk. My name is Gary Seven. I am a human being from the twentieth century. I was on my way
Humans of the twentieth century do not go beaming around the galaxy, Mister Seven.
I've been living on another planet far more advanced. I was beaming to Earth when you intercepted me.
The location of that planet?
They wish their existence kept secret. Even in your time, it will remain unknown.
It's impossible to hide a whole planet.
Impossible for you, not for them. Captain Kirk, I am of this time period. You are not. You interfere with me with what I have to do there, and you'll change history. You'll destroy the Earth and probably yourselves, too.
If what he says is true, Captain, every second we delay him could be dangerous.
And if he's lying?
This is the most critical period in Earth's history. The planet I'm from wants to help Earth survive.
What if it turns out you're an invading alien from the future?
A most difficult decision, Captain.
I can't beam you down without further proof one way or the other. Security confinement.
This way, please.
Sickbay.
McCoy here.
Jim. Jim! Jim. What's going on there?
Sickbay to transporter room.
Jim, what's going on down there?
Bones, check the prisoner you'll find in security confinement. I want a medical analysis fast. Is he or isn't he human?
What do you make of the cat, Mister Spock?
Quite a lovely animal, Captain. I find myself strangely drawn to it.
This is the captain. All science, engineering, and supervisory personnel, lock into the briefing room. Our next decision can be of enormous consequence, not only to us but to Earth's entire future. You've already been given as much information as we have. Please break in at any time with analysis of that information. Navigation report.
We have analysed the direction of his beam, sir. Our star maps show no habitable planets in that area of the galaxy.
He did say his planet was hidden, Captain.
Engineering.
Still unable to analyze it, sir. It was so powerful, it fused most of our recording circuits. Could have brought him back through great distances, could have brought him back through time. There's no way for us to know.
Mister Spock, historical report.
Current Earth crises would fill a tape bank, Captain. There will be an important assassination today, an equally dangerous government coup in Asia, and, this could be highly critical, the launching of an orbital nuclear warhead platform by the United States countering a similar launch by other powers.
Weren't orbital nuclear devices one of this era's greatest problems?
Most definitely. Once the sky was full of orbiting H-bombs, the slightest mistake could have brought one down by accident, setting off a nuclear holocaust.
McCoy here.
Bones, hurry with that report. Join me in the briefing room with your analysis.
Acknowledged.
You're tired. Go to sleep.
Well, I must admit the sensor readings seem too good. Human readings, yes, but not a single physical flaw. Totally perfect body.
If an alien needed a body.  
He might be inclined to prepare a perfect one, Captain. But then again he may be telling the truth.
Gentlemen, I need proof. All you're telling me is that on the one hand he may be lying and on the other
Security alert. All decks alert. The prisoner has escaped. All decks alert.
This is the Captain. Inform us
Bridge to Captain, transporter circuits show someone preparing to beam down.
Try to override. Shut it off!
I know, Isis. But we'll be gone before they get here.
You're right, Isis. It is primitive. It's incredible that people can exist like this. At least we won't have to. Not for long. Computer on.
(high-pitched staccato female) Computer on.
Specify locations of agents two oh one and three four seven.
Identify self.
Simply check my voice pattern. You'll find me listed as Supervisor one nine four. Code name Gary Seven.
Voice pattern matches, but I have no listing of a Gary Seven assigned this planet.
Computer, I am a class one supervisor. You are ordered to override previous instructions and answer my questions.
I am a Beta Five computer capable of analytical decisions. Please confirm identity as supervisor by describing nature of agents and mission here.
Computer, I caution you. I have little love for Beta Five snobbery. Override. All right. Agents are male and female, descendants of human ancestors taken from Earth approximately six thousand years ago. They're the product of generations of training for this mission. Problem. Earth technology and science have progressed faster than political and social knowledge. Purpose of mission. To prevent Earth's civilisation from destroying itself before it can mature into a peaceful society.
Incomplete but sufficient. Location of agents unreported for three days.
Why didn't you say so in the first place? No, don't answer that. Simply begin search immediately. Recheck all news broadcasts, decode any government intercepted message
I am aware of proper search procedures, one nine four.
We can estimate only within a thousand metres or so where he beamed down, Captain.
If we beam down, can you compare our position with his control setting?
Aye.
Following him down is a major risk, Captain. If we ourselves do anything that changes history
I'm aware of that. But I must know if he's lying, and we can't answer that sitting up here. Have ship's stores prepare the proper costumes. Stand by to beam us down.
In response to nuclear warhead placed in suborbit by other major power, United States today launching suborbital platform with multi-warhead capacity. Purpose, to maintain balance of power.
That's the same kind of nonsense that almost destroyed planet Omicron Four.
Analysis correct. Earth situation similar. Mission of agents two oh one and three four seven. Set malfunction on United States rocket.
Progress of mission Has the rocket been set to malfunction?
Negative. No progress.
How much time before launch?
Exactly one hour, twenty seven minutes, twelve seconds.
Computer, record the following. Unless agents are found immediately, I must undertake their mission.
Scotty, lock in on our position.
Lead us to him.
Locked in. Proceed one nine five degrees true.
Hello? Anybody here? Looks like your lucky day, Roberta. They can't dock you if they don't know you're late.
Where have you been?
Oh, the subway got stalled
Where have you been for the past three days?
Now, wait a minute. Why should I tell you? Who are you, anyway?
Where's three four seven?
With three four eight?
Two oh one, code responses are not necessary.
Listen, friend, maybe I'd just better call the police right now.
Sit down.
Who do you think you are?
I said sit down.
Okay, I will.
I'll say one thing for you. You play your role well. But that is no longer necessary. I'm Supervisor one nine four, code name Gary Seven. I need a complete report
Report.
Yes, report. Everything you have done for the past three Earth days.
Oh. Everything I've done?
Everything you've done.
Well, okay. (puts a sheet of paper in it.) Well, let's see.
Not with your fingers.
Well, how do you expect me to type, with my nose? Did you see that? The machine typed everything I. It's typing everything I'm saying! Stop it. Stop it! Stop it! (He turns it off.) Okay. That does it. I quit!
Wait a minute.
I'm quitting right now!
You're not acting, are you?
Acting? I'm leaving. Goodbye. (Seven locks the door remotely with his pen.) Hey. Hey!
Tie in to computer.
Computer on.
Scan unidentified female present.
Roberta Lincoln. Human. Profession, secretary. Employed by three four seven and two oh one. Description. Age twenty, five feet seven inches, one hundred twenty pounds, hair presently tinted honey blonde. Although behaviour appears erratic, possesses high IQ. Birthmarks
Hey.
Small mole on left shoulder. Somewhat larger star-shaped mark on her
Hey, watch it! Okay, I'll bite. What is it?
Miss Lincoln. Miss Lincoln, What kind of work did your employers say they were doing here?
Research for a new encyclopaedia? No? No.
All right. You can go. Of course, if you do, you won't be helping your country. Unless you don't care about that.
Sure, I care. What do you think I am?
I don't know, Miss Lincoln, what you are, not yet. All I know is that my incompetence has made you aware of very secret devices that are vital to the security of this nation.
Oh. Well, what are you guys around here, anyway? FBI? Some kind of government agents, huh? (The cat enters as he hands her one of his new IDs) CIA. Very groovy.
Thank you, Isis. I'll be right in. (Isis leaves) It's a trained cat, Just like guard dogs, that kind of thing.
Yeah?
Don't let anybody in here. I'll be busy.
Okay.
Scotty,
Triangulate on this location.
Correlated. Readings indicate a greater altitude. Approximately thirty metres higher, sir.
Out.
Occurrence, automobile accident. Location Highway nine four nine, ten miles north of McKinley Rocket Base. Agents three four seven and two oh one were killed instantly.
That just doesn't make sense. For them to die in something as useless as an automobile accident. Are the facts verified?
Verified. Descriptions of bodies are exact.
Go ahead, Scotty.
Proceed five metres, two four seven degrees true.
Computer off.
I don't know what you're talking about. Listen, you guys can't come in here.
Where's Mister Seven?
You can't come in here. Now, get out. What do you think you're doing? This is a government office.
Neither one of you can come in here.
Where's Mister Seven?
This is against the rules.
In here, Captain. (at door to main room)
What do you think you're doing? You want me to (picks up the telephone) Send the police. Eight Eleven East Sixty Eighth Street, apartment twelve B.
Give me the phone.
No, get your hands off of me, you big jerk! Who do you think you are? Let go!
What do you think you're doing, you big jerk? What's the big idea?
Mister Seven, help! Help!
Let go of me! Stop it! Don't go in there! What's the big idea? Get your hands off of me! I mean it!
Attention. Stand by for launch area clearance. It is now sixty minutes to launch. T minus sixty and counting.
Where's Mister Seven?
I'm warning you, I've already called the police.
Plans to McKinley Rocket Base.
Wide scan, Scotty. We'll be moving. Spock, in here. Spock!
In there!
Now, Scotty!
Reverse and energise.
Attention. It is now fifty minutes to launch. T minus fifty and counting. All systems clear. All systems clear. Standing by for inspection of launch pad.
(a security guard) You! Speak to you a moment?
Yeah, sure, Sarge. (hands over his NSA ID) There it is.
I'll have to confirm this, Colonel.
All right.
Just put the cat down and keep your hands at your side.
All right.
(into telephone) Give me security. Identification check.
Be careful, lsis. Don't get stepped on.
Yes, security?
(into telephone) Security, this is Sergeant Lipton, and we're all straightened out down here. Right, thank you very much. Goodbye. All right, Sergeant. Now let's just turn right around. We're going to walk this way. You just sit right down right right there and have a little nap.
Standby for inspection of launch pad.
Heading for the gantry. Sound alert.
Attention. First alert. First alert. Begin clearing gantry area. Clear launch pad. Safety group, clear launch pad. All systems continue to green. Repeat. All systems still green. Standing by for inspection of launch pad.
There's an old-style weather satellite in orbit below us. If I could bounce off it, I could get some good views. I've got it.
I could get even closer. If I could spot him, I could lock on and beam him up.
Chances are he's out of sight inside the rocket gantry or at one of the control centres.
Launch is in forty minutes. Stand by to beam us down. Continue visual scan.
Attention. Stand by for launch area clearance. Range safety verified. Launch director now en route to rocket gantry to confirm launch pad clear. Ground stations three, four and eleven, stand by for confirmation. Repeat. Standby for launch area clearance.
Hi, Jack.
Mister Cromwell.
Launch director at gantry, beginning final check.
Attention. It is now thirty five minutes to launch. T minus thirty five minutes and counting.
Canary Islands confirming they are go for the launch. All ground stations confirm go.
Lock the elevator at the top, Lieutenant. Time to get out of here.
Attention. Clear launch pad. Repeat. Clear launch pad and gantry.
Freeze! One move and you've both had it.
Intruder alert. Intruder alert. Security to launch director. We have unidentified intruders. Males. A pair. Do you want to delay countdown?
All right, don't answer, but you can tell him I quit. You can tell him I promise not to tell anybody anything. He's safe, and you're safe, my little green friend. (the box flashes twice) Same to you.
Attention. Twenty minutes to launch. T minus twenty minutes and counting. All systems continue green. Repeat. All systems still green.
Yes, thank you. I know how to open it. (with his ubiquitous pen) I know there's not much time.
These are all they were carrying.
T minus fifteen minutes and counting.
You've got a chance, and I'll offer it only this once. The slightest possible charges will be brought against you if you identify yourselves and tell us why you're here.
To delay countdown.
No sign of trouble on my boards. Launch director, confirm status all systems.
Control to launch director, confirming. Status board indicates all is well. Space flight conditions measure out as planned. 
Continue countdown.
No countdown delay. Repeat, no delay. All systems are green and go. All systems are go.
T minus fourteen and counting.
Meow? You are nervous, aren't you, doll? All right. I'm going as fast as I can.
T minus thirteen minutes and counting. Status board looks good. Stages look good. All systems go. Status board says go.
Security, send two men up here right away.
T minus eight minutes and counting. All systems go. Status board go.
No!
Stand by. I'm going to beam him up.
I had him and something yanked him away.
What are you doing? I wasn't finished.
I'm sorry. I just touched that button right there and then wow!
You must have intercepted the Enterprise trying to beam me on board. Computer on.
Lock into launch site scan.
One minute to launch.
Oh, my gosh!
Thirty seconds to launch.
Look, hey, I mean, not even the CIA could do all this.
T minus twenty seconds. Mark. Stages reporting ready for launch. Automatic sequences on. She's completely automatic now.
Fifteen seconds to launch. Ten seconds.
Nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one. Ignition. We have ignition.
Altitude one thousand feet. All good. All as planned. Trajectory nominal.
Rocket passing twenty mile arc and accelerating.
Computer, adjustments at the rocket base were not completed. Can I still take over the rocket as planned?
Rocket control possible with exceiver circuits operated manually.
Exceiver on manual. Lock into flight telemetry. Visual off.
Roberta, please don't try to leave. You'll find all the doors locked. Are you jealous, Isis? It's most unbecoming.
Rocket altitude now one hundred miles. Standing by to begin malfunction as planned.
Begin malfunction at third stage.
Exceiver setting now nine zero point zero eight.
Nine zero point zero eight.
Second stage ready to detach.
Visual on.
Second stage detaching.
Third stage igniting.
Begin malfunction. Take it off course.
Malfunction setting correct. Rocket veering from planned course.
Give me the readings fast.
What is it?
Malfunction. Rocket is deviating from programmed flight path.
Safety, standby to destruct. Continuing deviation from flight path. Repeat, deviation confirmed and increasing. Telemetry control transmitter systems tie in. All systems tie in. Report.
Arm the warhead.
Accomplished. Nuclear warhead now armed. Set exceiver nine one point two one eight.
Exceiver nine one point two one eight.
Scott here.
Sensor shows that the rocket has armed itself, Mister Scott.
Computers indicate an impact somewhere in the heart of the Euro-Asian continent.
We've still time to enter close orbit and destroy it with our phaser, sir.
They're beginning to worry on Earth, Mister Scott.
I'm getting military alerts from the major powers.
I've got to risk calling the captain. Lieutenant Uhura, open a channel.
Aye, aye.
Warhead status confirmed. She's armed herself somehow. Repeat. This bird is armed. The warhead's alive. All boards report status. Stand by on destruct. Standby to transmit destruct signal.
How could the warhead arm itself?
We don't know.
You can destroy it, of course.
If we can't, we're going to lay an H bomb on somebody somewhere. Ready on destruct signal. Destruct.
Transmit destruct signal. Transmit destruct signal.
Get back over there.
Look, I'm sorry, but like you asked me, I do care about my country, and you can't be CIA.
Orbital platform separating.
Hold it!
Computer, rocket status.
Hold it, Mister Seven. I'm telling you, you're through monkeying around with my country's rocket.
Warhead still armed. Six minutes to impact.
Hold it! Don't move! You did enough already!
You've got to let me finish what I started, or in six minutes World War Three begins.
Flight path continuing on target.
Destruct is fouled up somehow, flight control. She's coming down fully armed. She'll go off on impact.
What? Try again! Boost the signal!
Boosting signal. Boosting signal. Flight control, we have boosted destruct signal. Repeat. Destruct signal at maximum boost.
(over the open communicator) Captain, can you read me? I was beaming up Mister Seven, and something yanked him away from me.
Hello? Hello, come in.
Here, let me help you, Sergeant. It's operated with this dial here.
We're getting no response.
Make absolutely certain. Check everything again.
Tracking stations report no response on destruct signal.
Scotty, beam us directly to Seven's apartment.
Auxiliary transmitters check out flight control. She hasn't destructed herself. Repeat. Destruct is not working. She's still up there. Do you read? Descending and armed. Descending and armed. She'll go off on impact. Bermuda ground station reports she's still up there. South Africa ground station reports no response on boosted destruct signal.
(picks up the red telephone) Get me the president.
Rocket descending and accelerating. Do you have further instructions, one nine four?
Roberta, you've got to believe me. Look, a truly advanced planet wouldn't use force. They wouldn't come here in strange alien forms. The best of all possible methods would be to take human beings to their world, train them for generations until they're needed here.
Mister Seven, I want to believe you. I do. I know this world needs help. That's why some of my generation are kind of crazy and rebels, you know. We wonder if we're going to be alive when we're thirty.
Two minutes to impact.
Hold it right there, Mister Seven.
Oh, no.
Spock, you're the expert. Can you detonate the warhead from this computer?
I can try, Captain.
Altitude five hundred fifty miles.
Captain, I want that warhead detonated, too. Unless I do it at least a hundred miles above ground, just barely in time to frighten them out of this arms race
Captain, monitors show all major powers on full missile alert. Retaliatory strike ordered on warhead impact.
Altitude four hundred and fifty miles.
Spock.
I can estimate some of this, Captain, but without more time
Captain, he can only guess. Will you please let me do my job.
I don't know what your job is! You may set those controls so we can't detonate that warhead.
(pointing the pen at Kirk) Listen you, get away from him.
(grabbing the pen from her) Roberta, be careful. The servo is set to kill.
Altitude four hundred miles.
There are only seconds. I'll need time to set it.
Please. He's telling the truth.
Fifty five seconds to impact.
Spock, if you can't handle it, I'm going to have to trust him.
It is difficult to know which is best, Captain.
Forty seconds to impact.
Without facts, the decision cannot be made logically. You must rely on your human intuition.
Altitude three hundred miles. Descending and accelerating.
Go.
Thirty seconds and accelerating.
Computer, go to visual. Count by tens.
One hundred ninety miles. One hundred eighty miles. One hundred seventy miles. One hundred sixty miles. One hundred fifty, one hundred forty, one hundred thirty, one hundred twenty. (there's a bright flash) Detonation one hundred four miles.
And in spite of the accidental interference with history by the Earth ship from the future, the mission was completed.
Correction, Mister Seven. It appears we did not interfere. The Enterprise was part of what was supposed to happen on this day in 1968.
Our record tapes show, although not generally revealed, that on this date, a malfunctioning suborbital warhead was exploded exactly one hundred and four miles above the Earth.
So everything happened the way it was supposed to.
And you'll be pleased our records show that it resulted in a new and stronger international agreement against the use of such weapons.
Would you mind telling me who that is?
That, Miss Lincoln, is simply my cat.
Your cat?
What else do your record tapes show?
I'm afraid we can't reveal everything we know, Mister Seven.
Captain, we could say that Mister Seven and Miss Lincoln have some interesting experiences in store for them.
Yes, I think we could say that. Two to beam up, Scotty.
Live long and prosper, Mister Seven.
And the same to you, Miss Lincoln. Energise.