Spock's Brain
Phaser banks standing by, sir.
Range forty three thousand and closing.
What do you read, Mister Spock?
Configuration unidentified. Ion propulsion, high velocity, though of a unique technology.
Any contact, Lieutenant?
Hailing on all frequencies, sir. All languages have been attempted. No response. Now using standard interstellar symbols.
Keep trying.
Aye, sir.
Magnification ten, Mister Chekov.
Aye, sir. Thirty eight thousand and closing.
Well, Scotty?
It beats me, but isn't she a beauty?
Interesting design.
I've never seen anything like her. And ion propulsion at that. They could teach us a thing or two.
Life forms, Mister Spock?
One. Humanoid or similar. Low level of activity. Life-support systems functioning. Interior atmosphere, conventional nitrogen-oxygen. Instruments indicate a transferal beam emanating from the area of the humanoid life form.
Directed at what?
Directed at the Bridge of the Enterprise, Captain.
Security guard.
Security guard to the Bridge.
I'm Captain James Kirk. This is the Starship Enterprise.
What happened?
Helm status, Mister Sulu.
No change from last reading, sir.
Condition reports from all decks, Lieutenant.
Aye, sir.
Spock. Where's Spock?
Jim! Jim!
Yes, what is it?
You'd better come down to Sickbay
Right now.
All right. On my way.
Deck five. Personnel, no damage.
Now.
Functioning.
Thank God.
Spock. What happened?
I found him on the table.
Like this?
No, not like this.
What happened?
I don't know.
You've got him on complete life support. Was he dead?
He was worse than dead.
What do you mean?
Jim.
Come on, Bones. What's the mystery?
His brain is gone.
His what?
It's been removed surgically.
How could he survive?
It's the greatest technical job I've ever seen. Every nerve ending in the brain must've been neatly sealed. Nothing ripped, nothing torn, no bleeding. It's a medical miracle.
If his brain is missing, then Spock is dying.
No. That incredible Vulcan physique hung on until the life-support cycle took over. His body lives. The autonomic functions continue. But there is no mind.
That girl.
Aye.
What girl?
From that ship. She took it. I don't know why, or where, but she must have taken it. Bones, how long can you keep him functioning?
I can't give you any guarantee.
That's not good enough, Doctor.
If it happened to any of us, I'd say indefinitely. But Vulcan physiology limits what I can do. Spock's body is more dependent on that tremendous brain for life support.
Then we'll take him with us.
Take him? Take him where?
In search of his brain, Doctor. From what you say, the moment we find it we must restore it to his body, or we lose him.
Jim, where are you going to look? In this whole galaxy, where are you going to look for Spock's brain? How are you going to find it?
I'll find it.
Even if you do, I can't restore it. I don't have the medical technique.
It was taken out. It can be put back in.
But I don't know how.
The thief that took it has the knowledge. I'll force it out of her.
If you don't find it in twenty four hours, you'd better forget the whole thing, Jim.
You and Scotty have Spock ready.
I've got it again. An ion trail matching when we first saw her.
Where does the trail lead to?
System Sigma Draconis.
Lock on, Mister Sulu. Maximum speed.
Warp six.
No question about the trail?
No mistake, sir.
Captain, I've lost the trail.
All scanners, extreme sweep.
Aye, sir.
Well?
Nothing, sir.
No signal at all, Captain.
It's gone, sir. A sudden deaction shift.
We've lost her trail, but she went into that system. Mister Chekov, put a schematic of Sigma Draconis on the screen.
Aye, Captain.
Read out, Mister Chekov?
Sun, spectral type, Gamma nine. Nine planets, three of them, Class M possessing sapient life according to reports and long-range scanning.
She was breathing our air. She must've gone to one of them. Show us the three Class-M planets. Mister Chekov.
The one on the left, number three, rates letter B on the industrial scale.
Earth equivalent approximately 1485.
Yes, sir. Second planet Class M, number four, rates letter G.
The year 2030.
But that ship, Captain, either it was many years ahead of us or the most incredible design fluke in history.
Third Class M planet, Mister Chekov.
Number six. No sign of industrial development. At last report, in a Glacial Age. Sapient life plentiful, but on a most primitive level.
Now. as I understand it, Mister Chekov, there are three Class-M planets,
Yes, sir.
Not one of which is capable of launching an interstellar flight,
No, sir.
Yet one of them accomplished it.
Yes, sir.
Thank you, Mister Chekov.
Captain, I'm picking up high energy generation on planet six.
That's the primitive glaciated planet.
Yes, sir.
The source of it?
It could be natural. Volcanic activity, steam, any number of causes. But it's very regular.
What do your surface readings show, Mister Chekov?
No sign of organised civilisation. Primitive humanoids picked up at irregular intervals.
With regular pulsations of generated energy?
I can't explain it, sir.
I can't afford to guess wrong. I've got to choose the right planet, get there, find the brain. Eight hours and thirty five minutes.
Recommendations, Mister Chekov.
Sigma Draconis Three. It's closest, heaviest population.
But a technological rating of only three. They couldn't possibly have put that ship we saw into space.
None of these planets could.
I say planet four, Captain. At least planet four is ahead of three technologically.
But advanced ion propulsion is beyond even our capabilities. It'd be a miracle if they had developed it.
What would they want with his brain? What would they want with Mister Spock's brain? What use is it?
Yes.
Why do they want it?
Yes. Why would they want it? Eight hours and thirty four minutes. Planet six is glaciated, you say?
Several thousand years at least. Only the tropical zone is ice-free.
But the energy. Regular. It's there. It's real.
Yes, sir. It doesn't make sense, but it's there.
Have the transporter room stand by. I'm taking a landing party down to planet six.
Aye, aye, sir.
A hunch, Captain?
A hunch, Mister Sulu.
What if you guess wrong, Captain?
If I guess wrong, Mister Spock is dead. Spock will die.
Suit temperatures to seventy two. Life-form readings, Mister Spock? (gets a look) Mister Scott?
Scattered. Widely spaced. Humanoid, all right. On the large side.
Watch out. We know their development is primitive.
Aye.
Read out, Mister Chekov.
No structures, Captain. No mechanised objects that I can read. No surface consumption or generation of energy. Atmosphere is perfectly all right, of course. Temperature, a high maximum of forty. Livable.
You have a thick skin.
Captain! There's someone, something out there in the rocks. Five of them. Humanoid, large.
Phasers on stun. I want them conscious.
Fire only on my signal. Flank out.
We mean you no harm. We're not your enemies, we're your friends. We only wish to talk to you.
You are not the Others?
No. We come from a far place. We are men.
Men?
Like yourselves.
You are small, like the Others.
Who are the Others?
Givers of pain and delight.
Do they live here with you?
No. They come. They give pain and delight.
Do they come from the sky?
They are here. You will see. The Others will come for you. They come for all like us.
Do they come for your women as well?
Women?
The female of your kind.
Your words say nothing.
Don't you have a mate?
Mate?
A companion.
Will you take us where we can find the Others?
(afraid) No one wants to find them.
We do. We want to find them. Take us there and we'll let you go.
Captain, five hundred metres in that direction there's a foundation under the surface. A huge one. Registrations all over the place.
Buildings?
Yes, sir. Immensely old, completely buried. But they were here once.
Somewhere down there is where the Others live. Scotty, see if you can find a way down.
Aye, sir.
No! No! No, do not go there! No! No!
It's all right.
It's all right. Let him go.
What could the Others do to cause such terror?
What was it he said, pain and delight?
A peculiar mixture.
A dead and buried city on a planet in a glacial age.
And the male humanoid who doesn't know the meaning of the word female.
Captain!
Over here, sir. There's food in there and a whole pile of other stuff. A storehouse for our muscular friends.
I don't think so. Scotty.
Metal. Forged, tempered. Our apish friends didn't make these. What do you think?
It could be a warning device to keep those creatures away from the food.
Or the food could be a lure set by the Others to bring them in here.
In that case, the beam would be a signal.
And this cave a trap.
If it will trap the creatures for the Others, Captain, won't it trap us, too?
Exactly.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise. Uhura here.
Have Doctor McCoy beam down immediately.
Aye, sir.
Mister Chekov, you and the security team will remain here at the entrance. We'll be in constant contact with you.
Aye, sir.
All right, Bones. Bring him along.
Keep him close to the right.
Ready?
Call Chekov and tell him to send my stomach down.
It might be a long wait. We may as well be comfortable.
Phasers on stun.
Captain, that power we picked up above, we're getting closer.
A lot of it?
Enough to push this planet out of orbit.
What source?
Either a nuclear pile a hundred miles across or
Or what?
Ion power.
We're slowing down.
Is she all right?
I'll have her talking in a minute.
You do not belong here. You are not Morg.
Who's in charge? I wish to speak to him.
Him? What is him?
What have you done with Spock's brain? Where've you taken it?
You are not Morg or Eymorg. I know nothing about a brain.
You're lying!
She's not, Jim. No change in reading. She doesn't know.
(to Scott) See what you can pick up on your communicator.
Aye.
We don't want to hurt you. What is this place?
This place is here.
Who are you?
I am Luma. I am Eymorg. You are not Eymorg. You are not Morg. What are you?
Jim, it's no use. You'll get nothing out of that one. Hers is the mind of a child.
Captain, I've got something, but I can't quite get a fix on it.
Fascinating. Activity without end, but with no volition.
Spock, is that you?
Captain? Captain Kirk?
Yes, Spock. Yes.
Captain, there is a definite pleasurable experience connected with the hearing of your voice.
Where are you, Spock?
Is that you, Doctor McCoy, and are you with the Captain?
Where else would I be?
Mister Spock, where are you?
Engineer Scott as well. Unfortunately, I do not know where I am.
We'll get you, Spock. It won't be long.
A practical idea, Captain. It seems unlikely that I shall be able to get to you.
Quickly!
There she is. That's the one. What have you done with Spock's brain?
What are you? Why are you here? You have something to speak?
What have you done with Spock's brain?
We do not know Spock.
This is Spock. You saw him on the ship. You have his brain. It must be restored to him immediately. What have you done with it?
Ah, yes, brain. You spoke to Luma also of brain, but we do not understand.
I do not know about Luma, but you were on the Enterprise. I saw you.
I do not know these things you speak of.
You came to my ship!
We know only here below and here above. This is our place. You are not Morg. You are stranger.
I saw you on my ship.
Jim, she may not remember or even really know. Disassociation could be complete. It doesn't seem possible she could have performed surgery on Spock.
No, it doesn't.
You hurt Luma. It is not permitted again to hurt anyone.
Sorry. We don't want to hurt anyone.
If you wish to return to your home, you may go.
No. We'll stay here and learn about you and tell you of us.
Yes, for instance, above it's cold and harsh. And below, it's warm. The air is fresh.
Aye. There's no sun, but there's light.
I wish to talk to those in charge.
In charge?
Yes, the organisers, the managers. The leader of your people.
I am leader. There is no other.
That's impossible. Who built the machines?
Who are the doctors? Who operates?
Who controls this complex?
Control? Controller?
Yes, the Controller. The Controller. Who controls? I would like to meet, to see him.
No. It is not permitted. Never! Controller is alone, apart. We serve Controller. No other is permitted near.
We intend no harm.
You have come to destroy us.
No, no, no. I promise you.
We just want to talk to somebody about Spock's brain. That's all.
Brain and brain! What is brain? It is Controller, is it not?
Yes. Yes, in a way it is. The human brain controls the individual's functions.
Bones. Scotty. Spock's brain controls
It's not possible.
Great leader. Great leader! (He kneels in front of Kara.) We come from a far place to learn from your Controller.
You lie! You know me. You have said that. You came to take back the Controller.
He is our friend. You must take us to him. We beg you. Soon it will be too late.
Do not take them, Kara. Do not take them to the Controller.
They will be prevented.
You must take us.
I must learn what to do. (to Luma) Come with me. You will keep them here.
Yes, mistress.
I never felt anything like that. Every nerve in my body was on fire.
I wouldn't believe the human organism could take such pain.
These are on to stay for a while. Must be a magnetic lock of some kind.
No wonder the Morgs are so obedient, and terrified.
How is this place kept functioning by the primitive minds we've met?
Those women could never have set up anything as complex as this has to be. Why, that takes engineering genius. But there's no sign of engineering genius in any of those women.
They were smart enough to invent these training devices. What a way to maintain control over a man.
Pain and delight, he said up above.
I'm sure you noticed the delight aspect of this place.
Yes, I certainly did notice those delightful aspects. But that too was strictly under command of the women.
How does Spock's brain fit into this?
With a communicator, we might be able to find out. This fellow is keeping us from our property.
Isn't there a way to correct that situation?
I certainly think that science might provide an answer.
It does, Captain.
Agreed, Doctor.
Science will triumph. Come on, Scotty. Bones, give them something to keep them out for a while. (into communicator) Spock. Spock. Come on, Spock. Spock, you were on this frequency, Spock.
Yes, Captain, I am still here. Have you returned to the Enterprise?
No. We might be able to locate you, if you gave us some idea of what they were using you for. Is it medical?
I am not certain. I seem to have a body which stretches into infinity.
Body? Why, you have none.
Then what am l?
You are a disembodied brain.
Fascinating. It could explain much, Doctor. My medulla oblongata is hard at work apparently breathing, apparently pumping blood, apparently maintaining a normal physiologic temperature.
Spock, we don't have time for that.
Why are you endangering your lives by coming here?
We came to put you back. Where are you?
Back where?
Back into your body. We brought it along with us.
Thoughtful, Captain, but probably impractical. While I might trust the doctor to remove a splinter or lance a boil, I do not believe he has the knowledge to restore a brain.
Thank you.
No denigration intended, Doctor McCoy. That skill does not yet exist in the galaxy.
The skill to remove it exists right where we are. Restoring it must also be possible. That's why we've got to get to you as quickly as we can.
Captain, I appreciate the risks you are taking on my behalf, but I must insist they are worthwhile only if there is a reasonable chance for success. Let me ask you, how much time has elapsed since
Eighteen hours and twelve minutes.
Doctor McCoy must've told you that twenty four hours is the maximum my body can
I told him.
That leaves us exactly five hours and forty eight minutes, Spock.
It does seem all too brief a time to develop such skills, does it not?
Yes. Very brief. That's why we must get to you immediately. Beam us a signal so we can home in on you.
Acknowledged.
Got it.
Bones. (Spock's body stands up and they walk out of the room)
Oh, Spock, one question.
Yes, Captain.
We've got pain-giving devices attached to us. Can you tell us how to get them off.
I shall give it top priority.
Captain, I have an answer for you. It seems your pain bands are manually controlled. The red button on a bracelet releases them. I know that does not make much sense.
Oh, yes it does, Spock. (further along) Keep concentrating, Spock. Keep concentrating, Spock.
Must be in there, Captain.
Jim.. Spock. No pain.
No. Go away.
We will die. You must not take the Controller away. We will all die. The Controller is young and powerful. Perfect!
How very flattering.
You will give life to my people for ten thousand years to come.
You'll find another Controller.
The old one is finished! There is no other than this and will not be another for ten thousand years.
Spock, you're in a black box tied in with light rays into a complex control panel.
Fascinating.
You say you're breathing, pumping blood, maintaining temperature? Is it possible that you're re-circulating air, running heating plants, purifying water?
Indeed, Captain. That is unquestionably part of what I am doing.
He must stay. He must stay!
He will not stay. (He makes Spock release her, and grabs her himself, taking off her bracelet.) Now, you took his brain. You will put it back. How did you do it?
I do not know.
She couldn't, Jim. Her mind is functioning on a very simple level. Mental faculties here seem to be almost atrophied because of non-use.
She was on the Enterprise. She must have done it. How did you do it?
It was the old knowledge.
How do you get the old knowledge?
I put upon my head the Teacher.
What is the Teacher?
The great Teacher of all the ancient knowledge.
If I may explain, Captain. She refers to the tape storehouse of knowledge of the builders of this place. I scan it. A most impressive store.
How does it work? Show us.
You must tell us.
I cannot. Only by command of the ancients may I understand.
How does it work? Show us! We'll protect you.
It is a device with feeding circuits. They lead into the mind of the priestess leader. Its use is strictly predetermined by the builders.
No! The knowledge is forbidden! I must not know the secret! I will be punished!
(confident, assured) Gentlemen, the Controller's explanation of the functioning of the Teacher is essentially correct. However, he is giving no credit to me. I provide the means whereby the knowledge is used. Without me, Captain
Without you there could be no delicate miracle that kept Spock's brain alive.
Thank you, Doctor. That was very gracious.
Yes. From the very first, I appreciated your ability.
Good, Captain Kirk. Then you also appreciate that without the Teacher, I would not have the knowledge to use that which you have thoughtfully provided.
That phaser is set to kill.
So it is. That is the knowledge you have brought me. Do not move. If your weapon kills, it will kill you.
We're not the first to bring you the knowledge of killing. If you continue, you'll kill Spock.
The Controller die? The Controller will live for ten thousand years, and we shall give him all our devotion.
But Spock will be dead. His body's dying this minute.
Why do you not understand that the need of my people for their Controller is greater than your need for your friend.
No one may kill a man. Not for any purpose. It cannot be condoned.
Do not! I do not know killing. I do not wish to kill.
The commandment must be fulfilled.
You must help us. When you came to the ship, you had the knowledge. Yet, when we came here, you didn't.
Correct.
How long does the knowledge last?
Three of your hours.
It would be just enough time.
If you had the knowledge, could you restore what you've taken?
I would not.
You must help us. You must restore with that knowledge what you have taken.
No!
You must put back what you have taken.
I will not betray my people. The Controller will stay.
Jim, it worked for her. It might work for me.
She is an alien. The configurations of her brain are different. It could cause irreparable damage to your human brain, Doctor.
I'm a surgeon already. If I could learn these techniques, I might be able to retain them.
Captain, you might lose the doctor that way.
He might, but we're sure to lose you if I don't try.
I cannot allow you to jeopardise your life for me.
Spock, didn't you hear? I might be able to retain and bring these techniques to the world. Jim, isn't it worth that risk? Wouldn't you insist upon taking such a risk yourself?
Go ahead, Doctor. Put the Teacher on.
No!
Of course. Of course. A child could do it. A child could do it.
I've never seen anything like it. He's operating at warp speed. I'd like a try at that teacher myself.
You will have him back and we will be destroyed.
No. You won't be destroyed. You'll be without your Controller for the first time, but you'll be much better off, I think.
We will die.
No, you'll live and develop as you should have. All this shouldn't have been done for you. Now the women here below and the men here above will control together.
They will not help us without the pain.
There are other ways. You'll discover them. You must move to the surface, you understand.
We will die above in the cold.
No, you won't. You'll learn to build houses, to keep warm, to work. We'll help you for a while. Humans have survived under worse conditions. It's a matter of evolution. You'll be fine.
Captain Kirk!
What is it?
He's forgetting.
I can't. I
Bones? Bones?
All the ganglia, the nerves. There are a million of them. What am I supposed to do? What am I supposed to do?
Bones, you can't stop now.
I'm trying to thread a needle with a sledgehammer. What am I supposed to do? I can't remember. I don't remember.
Bones?
No one can restore a brain.
You could. A while ago it was child's play.
Well?
He's dying, and I can't stop it.
(hoarse) Yes. Doctor McCoy.
Spock?
If you will finish reconnecting my speech centre, I might be able to help.
Speech centre.
Yes. That's correct. One thing at a time. Ah, ah, mmm. (normal voice) That's better. Now, Doctor. Try the sonic separator.
Sonic separator.
Yes, I believe I already have some sensation of feeling. Please stimulate the nerve endings and observe the physical reactions, one by one. In each case, I shall tell you when the probe is correct. You will then seal using the tri-laser connector.
Tri-laser connector. Ready?
Ready.
Right forefinger.
(twitching) Correct.
Right wrist.
Correct.
Right elbow.
Correct. Very good, Doctor.
I'll never live this down. This Vulcan is telling me how to operate.
Closed.
Well?
How do I know? I could have made a thousand mistakes. Sealing nerve endings, joining ganglia. The fluid balance is correct, but I don't know.
Congratulations, Doctor. And thank you.
How do you feel, Spock?
On the whole, Captain, I believe I am quite fit. Fascinating. A remarkable example of a retrograde civilisation. At the peak, advanced beyond any of our capabilities and now operating at this primitive level which you saw. And it all began thousands of years ago when a glacial age reoccurred. This underground complex was developed for the women. The men remained above, and a male-female schism took place. A fascinating cultural development of a kind which never
I knew it was wrong. I shouldn't have done it.
What's that?
I should have never reconnected his mouth.
Well, we took the risk, Doctor.
(to Kara, amid laughter) As I was saying, a fascinating cultural development of the kind which hasn't been seen in ages. The last such occurrence took place on old Earth, when the Romans were warring with the ....
The Enterprise Incident
I have completed the assignment, Captain. A theoretical incursion into
Yes, Mister Chekov. I can read, and as usual your theoretical evaluations do not tally with mine. Return to your duty and I'll let you know when your work is satisfactory.
Mister Spock. Full sensor scan of the region, please.
I did give a full report
Yes, Mister Spock, that was the past. I'm concerned with the present. Or is it becoming too much for this crew to present me current information?
Then, Mister Spock, comply.
Sensor scan to one half parsec. Negative, Captain.
Very well.
I can find no reason for the captain's behaviour, except possibly that we've been on patrol too long without relief and diversion. He has resisted all of my attempts to run a psychological profile on him.
Maintaining course and speed, sir.
Change course. Come about to one eight five, mark three.
But, sir, that'll lead us directly into the Romulan Neutral Zone.
Yes, very perceptive, Mister Sulu. I know where the course change takes us. Execute.
Aye, sir.
Increasing sensor scan to one parsec. All scanners report clear. Nothing in our immediate vicinity.
Better and better, Mister Spock.
Captain, leaving Neutral Zone. Now entering Romulan space.
Very well, Mister Sulu.
Lieutenant, when did the order come through?
Order?
From Starfleet. The order to enter the Neutral Zone.
There's been no order I know of, Mister Scott.
Surely the Captain couldn't be doing this on his own authority.
If you two have complaints, you can bring them out into the open.
That's a Klingon ship! But it couldn't be, not in this area.
Intelligence reports Romulans now using Klingon design.
Sound Red Alert. Man battle stations. Stand by main phasers.
Battle stations. All hands, battle stations.
A second ship has appeared. (another one decloaks) Correction, there are now three. We are surrounded.
Lieutenant Uhura, code a message to Starfleet Command. Advise them of our situation. Include all log entries to this point.
Aye, sir.
Mister Spock, your sensors read clear. What happened?
I have a theory, Captain.
Captain Kirk, I'm receiving a class two signal from the Romulan vessel.
Put it on the main viewing screen, Lieutenant, and complete that message to Starfleet Command.
Aye, sir.
(a thin male) You have been identified as the star ship Enterprise, Captain James T. Kirk last known to be in command.
Your information is correct. This is Captain Kirk.
I am Sub-commander Tal of the Romulan fleet. Your ship is surrounded, Captain. You will surrender immediately, or we will destroy you.
Lieutenant. (mutes sound) They want something, or they would have destroyed us by now.
True, Captain. That would be standard Romulan procedure.
It's my ship they want, and very badly.
It would be a great prize.
Lieutenant. (sound on) Save your threats. If you board this ship, I'll blow it up. You'll gain nothing.
Who is that beside you?
My first officer, Commander Spock.
Vulcan. (his communicator beeps and he answers it) Yes, Commander. Yes, Commander. No one should decide quickly to die, Captain. We give you one of your hours. If you do not surrender your ship at the end of that time, your destruction is certain. We will be open to communication should you wish it.
You understand that Starfleet Command has been advised of the situation?
The subspace message will take three weeks to reach Starfleet. The decision is yours, Captain. One hour.
The design of the ship is the same. Mister Spock, you said you had a theory on why your sensors didn't pick up the new ships until they were upon us.
I believe the Romulans have developed a cloaking device which renders our tracking sensors useless.
If so, Romulans could attack in Federation territory before we knew they were there, before a vessel or planet could get even begin to get their defences up.
They caught us right enough.
Well, that's a brilliant observation, Mister Scott. Do you have any other helpful opinions?
We've not got many choices.
We have three. We can fight and be destroyed, or we can destroy the Enterprise ourselves and keep her from the Romulans. Or we can surrender. Opinions, gentlemen.
If the Enterprise is taken by Romulans, they'll know everything there is to know about a starship.
If we had not crossed the Neutral Zone, on your order, you would not now need our opinions to support a decision which should never have had to be made.
Jim, you ordered us? You had no authority!
Dismissed, Doctor.
Jim!
I said dismissed.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
The Romulan vessel is signalling again, sir.
Put them on the screen.
Aye, aye, sir.
My commander wishes to speak with you, Captain Kirk.
Put him on.
The commander wishes to see you and your first officer aboard this vessel. It is felt this matter requires discussion.
Why should we walk right into your hands?
Two of my officers will beam aboard your vessel as exchange hostages while you are here.
What guarantee do we have they'll beam aboard our ship once we're on yours?
Granted, we do not easily trust each other, Captain, but you are the ones who violated our territory. Should it not be we who distrust your motives? However, we agree to simultaneous exchange.
Give us your transporter co-ordinates. We're beaming aboard.
One final order, Engineer Scott. If we do not return, the Enterprise must not be taken. If the Romulans attempt it, you're to fight, and if necessary, destroy yourselves. Is that clear?
Perfectly clear.
Energise.
Captain Kirk.
Commander. I'm honoured.
I don't think so, but we have an important matter to discuss. And your superficial courtesies are an overture to that discussion. You are the first officer?
Spock.
I speak first with the Captain. You may wait outside.
The matter of trespass into Romulan space is one of galactic import, a violation of treaties. Now I ask you simply, what is your mission here?
Instrument failure caused navigational error. We were across the Neutral Zone before we realised it, then we were surrounded by your ships before we could get back.
A starship? One of the Starfleet's finest vessels? You're saying instrument failure as radical as you suggest went unnoticed until you were well past the Neutral Zone?
Accidents happen. Cut off back-up systems malfunction. We were due for overhaul two months ago.
I see. But you were able to navigate with this malfunction?
The error was corrected.
But I doubt it'll clear you of espionage.
We were not spying, Commander.
Your language has always been most difficult for me, Captain. Perhaps you have another word for it.
You're grossly mistaken if you think we were there
Captain, if a Romulan vessel ventured far into Federation territory without good explanation, what would a starbase commander do? You see, it works both ways. I hardly believe you are the injured party. Spock, come in.
The captain has made his statement.
I understand.
I must admit some surprise on seeing you, Spock. We were not aware of Vulcans aboard the Enterprise.
Starfleet is not in the habit of informing Romulans of its ships' personnel.
Quite so. Yet there are certain ships, certain officers, that are known to us. Your situation appears most interesting.
What earns Spock your special interest?
He is a Vulcan. Our forebears had the same roots and origins. Something you wouldn't understand, Captain. We can appreciate the Vulcans, our distant brothers. I have heard of Vulcan integrity and personal honour. There's a well-known saying, or is it a myth, that Vulcans are incapable of lying?
It is no myth.
Then tell me truthfully now, by your honour as a Vulcan, what was your mission?
I reserve the privilege of speaking only when it will not violate my honour as a Vulcan.
It is unworthy of a Vulcan to resort to subterfuge.
You're being clever, Commander. That is unworthy of a Romulan. It is not a lie to keep the truth to oneself.
Then there is a truth here that remains unspoken.
You've been told everything. There's nothing else to say.
There is Mister Spock's unspoken truth. You knew of the cloaking device that we have developed. You deliberately violated Romulan space with a blatant spy mission, by order of the Federation.
We've been all through that, Commander!
We have not even begun! There's no force that I can use on a Vulcan that will make him speak. That is a fact. But there are Romulan methods completely effective against humans and human weaknesses.
You would not resort to them, Commander. They would prove ineffective against the captain.
Then they will leave him dead, or what might be worse than dead. But I will know your unspoken truths.
Let her rant. There's nothing to say.
I cannot allow the captain to be further destroyed. The strain of command has worn heavily upon him. He's not been himself for several weeks.
That's a lie!
As you can see, Captain Kirk is a highly sensitive and emotional person. I believe he has lost the capacity for rational decision.
Shut up, Spock!
I'm betraying no secrets. The commander's suspicion that Starfleet ordered the Enterprise into the Neutral Zone is unacceptable. Our rapid capture demonstrates its foolhardiness.
You filthy liar!
I am speaking the truth for the benefit of the Enterprise and the Federation. I say now and for the record, that Captain Kirk ordered the Enterprise across the Neutral Zone on his own initiative and his craving for glory.
(having to be held back by the guards) I'll kill you, you filthy traitor! I'll kill you! I'll kill you!
He is not sane.
(into comm. system) Attention, Enterprise, I am speaking to you from the Romulan flagship.
The USS Enterprise, under command of Captain James T. Kirk, is formally charged with espionage. The testimony of First Officer
Spock was highly instrumental in confirming this intrusion into Romulan space was not an accident. First Officer Spock's testimony was specific that your ship was not under orders from Starfleet Command or the Federation council to perform such a spy mission.
It was Captain Kirk who was solely responsible. Since the crew had no choice but to obey orders, the crew will not be held responsible. Therefore, I am ordering Engineer Scott, presently in command of the Enterprise, to follow the Romulan flagship
To our home base. You will there be processed and released to Federation Command. Until judgment is passed, Captain Kirk will be held in confinement.
Security, put our two Romulan hostages in the brig. Lieutenant Uhura, give me a channel to that ship.
Channel is open, Mister Scott, and you are tied in.
This is Lieutenant Commander Scott. The Enterprise takes no orders, except those of Captain
Kirk, And we will stay right here until he returns. And if you make any attempt to board or commandeer the Enterprise, it will be blown to bits along with as many of you as we can take with us.
You humans make a brave noise. There are ways to convince you of your errors.
Did you hear that, you coward? You've betrayed everything of value you ever knew. Did you hear the sound of human integrity?
Take him to the security room.
A Vulcan among humans. Living, working with them. I would think the situation would be intolerable to you.
I am half Vulcan. My mother is a human.
To whom is your allegiance then? Do you call yourself Terran or Vulcan?
Vulcan.
How long have you been a Starfleet officer, Spock?
Eighteen years.
And you serve Captain Kirk. Do you like him? Do you like your shipmates?
The question is irrelevant.
Possibly, but you are subordinate to Captain Kirk's orders, even to his whims.
My duty as an officer is to obey him.
You are a superior being. Why do you not command?
I do not desire a ship of my own.
Or is it that no one has offered you, a Vulcan, that opportunity?
Such opportunities are extremely rare.
For someone with your capabilities and accomplishments, opportunities are made and will be. I will see to that, if you'll stop looking on the Federation as the whole universe. It is not, you know.
That thought has occasionally crossed my mind.
You must have your own ship.
Commander, shall we speak plainly? It is you who desperately need a ship. You want the Enterprise.
Of course. It would be a great achievement for me to bring home the Enterprise intact. It would broaden the scope of my powers greatly. It would be the achievement of a lifetime. And it would open equal opportunities for you.
Bridge to Doctor McCoy.
McCoy here.
Doctor, you must beam aboard the Romulan flagship immediately. There's been an injury.
I don't make house calls.
Doctor, it's Captain Kirk!
He'll recover, but he'll need further attention. Inform your superior.
Yes? I'll come there. Attend me.
I neglected to mention, I'll expect you for dinner. We have much to discuss.
Indeed.
Allow me to rephrase. Will you join me for dinner?
I am honoured, Commander. Are the guards also invited?
Mister Spock. That corridor is forbidden to all but loyal Romulans.
Of course. I shall obey your restrictions.
I hope that one day there will be no need for you to observe any restrictions.
It would be illogical to assume that all conditions remain stable.
Are you the doctor?
McCoy. Chief medical officer.
Captain Kirk's condition?
Well, you can see for yourself, he's mentally depressed, physically weak, disoriented, displays feelings of persecution and rebellion.
Then by your own standards of normality, this man is not fully competent.
No, not now.
Mister Spock has stated that he believes the captain had no authority or order to cross the Neutral Zone. Could this mental incapacity have afflicted him earlier?
Yes, it's possible.
Mister Spock, the doctor has now confirmed your testimony as to the mental state of your captain. He was and is unfit to continue in command of the Enterprise. That duty has fallen on you. Are you ready to exercise that function?
I am ready.
Spock, I don't believe it. There's no price you could pay that would make him sell out.
The matter is not open for discussion, Doctor.
What do you mean, the matter's not open for discussion?
That's enough, Doctor. As a physician, your duty is to save lives. Mister Spock's duty is to lead the Enterprise and its crew to a safe haven.
There is no alternative, Doctor. The safety of the crew is now the paramount issue. It is misguided loyalty to resist any further.
You traitor. I'll kill you. I'll kill you. I'll kill you!
What did you do? What did you do?
I was unprepared for his attack. I instinctively used the Vulcan death grip.
Your instincts are still good, Mister Spock. The captain is dead.
I left orders that no one come in here.
But he's alive, alive!
Well now that you know it, you might as well assist me. Hand me the physiostimulator.
But he was dead. Their doctors certified he was dead.
Spock gave him a nerve pinch to simulate death.
Then Mister Spock isn't a traitor, and you knew that and you didn't
I didn't know it until I beamed aboard the Romulan ship. Jim and Spock were operating under Federation orders.
Oh. (sitting up) My neck feels like it's been twisted off.
That's the Vulcan death grip for you.
There's no such thing as a Vulcan death grip.
Ah, but the Romulans don't know that. Sure fooled the doctors.
You took a big chance they didn't start an autopsy.
As far as the rest of the crew's concerned, I'm still dead.
That's what this whole masquerade was about. To keep the Enterprise and the Federation off the hook.
So that if anything went wrong, you would be the one to blame.
Bones, I want you to prepare for surgery.
What for?
Sickbay to Bridge.
Scott here, Doctor.
Mister Scott, will you report to Sickbay.
Sickbay? I can't leave the bridge at a time like this.
You have to. It's urgent.
We're surrounded by enemy vessels ready to attack us. I don't know of anything more urgent than that.
Well, I do. Mister Scott, please.
All right, Doctor. It better be important. Scott out.
All right, Doctor, what's so urgent that... Captain? Captain Kirk.
Yes.
Well, you look like the devil himself, but as long as you're alive. What's it all about?
Are those Romulan officers still aboard the ship?
They're in the brig, sir.
I'll need a Romulan uniform.
I've had special Vulcan dishes prepared for you. I hope they're to your liking.
I am very flattered, Commander. There's no doubt that the cuisine aboard your vessel is far superior to that of the Enterprise. It is indeed a very powerful recruiting inducement.
We have other inducements.
What the devil is Spock doing? What's delaying him?
I wish I knew. Scotty, are you sure we have a clear channel to Spock?
Aye, sir. No doubt of it.
Then we can't wait any longer. Prepare to beam me aboard the flagship.
But Mister Spock hasn't sent the proper co-ordinates yet.
It can't be helped, Scotty.
You're taking an awful chance, Jim.
Just don't put me inside a bulkhead. Energise.
Centurion. I'm sorry, no one is allowed
I've just effected an escape from the Federation vessel. I have important information for Sub-commander Tal. Where is he?
He's in control central, sir.
Good. I shall remember to mention your alertness to him. Return to your duty.
Thank you, Centurion.
You have nothing in Starfleet to which to return. I offer, we offer you an alternative. We will find a place for you, if you wish it.
A place?
With me. Romulan women are not like Vulcan females. We are not dedicated to pure logic and the sterility of non-emotion. Our people are warriors. Often savage. But we are also many other pleasant things.
I was not aware of that aspect of Romulan society.
As a Vulcan, you would study it. As a human you would find ways to appreciate it.
Please believe me. I do appreciate it.
I am so glad. Now one final step to make the occasion complete. You will lead a small party of Romulans aboard the Enterprise, and there you will take your rightful place as its commander. And you will lead the ship to a Romulan port, with my flagship at its side.
Yes, of course, but not just this moment. An hour from now will do even better. Would it not, Commander?
Yes. Yes, it will, Mister Spock. You do know I have a first name.
I was beginning to wonder.
Well, I do. Would you like to hear it?
How rare, and how beautiful. But so incongruous when spoken by a soldier.
If you will give me a moment, the soldier will transform herself into a woman.
Spock to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Captain
Are you prepared to beam over?
I'm already on board, Spock. Do you have the information?
Yes, Captain. The cloaking device is in an area near the commander's quarters. It is closely guarded and off-limits to all but authorised personnel. What is your present location?
Sub-commander Tal. I'm receiving an alien transmission from within our vessel, sir.
Alien? Are you certain?
Yes, Sub-commander.
I must know the source!
Triangulating now, sir.
Spock, I'll get the cloaking device. Will you be able to get back to the Enterprise without attracting their attention?
Unknown, Captain. At present, I am rather heavily
Is my attire now more appropriate, Mister Spock?
Commander, your attire is not only more appropriate, it should actually stimulate our conversation.
Centurion, have you clearance for this area? I do not recognise you.
There's an intruder aboard. Has someone tried to gain entrance there?
I must see your authorisation, sir.
Over there!
It's hard to believe that I can be so moved by the touch of an alien hand.
I must confess that I too am moved emotionally. I know it is illogical.
Mister Spock, we mustn't question what we truly feel. Accept what is happening between us, even as I do.
Commander? Permission to enter.
Not now, Tal.
It is urgent, Commander.
Enter.
Commander, we have intercepted an alien transmission.
Locate its source.
We have, Commander. This room.
The cloaking device. Bring him.
Halt. Don't move. Who are you? What are you doing in here?
There's an enemy spy aboard. He'll be after the cloaking device.
Drop your weapon.
Scotty, energise.
But, sir, what about Mister Spock?
We'll just have to hope he can buy us enough time to get this cloaking device installed.
It'll have to hook into our deflector shield control.
Can you do it?
I don't know, sir.
You have fifteen minutes, Scotty.
Commander, the cloaking device is gone.
Full alert. Search all decks.
That will be profitless, Commander. I do not believe you will find it.
You must be mad.
I assure you I am quite sane.
Why would you do this to me? What are you that you could do this?
First officer of the Enterprise. (Broken-hearted, she slaps his face.) What is your present form of execution?
Captain!
You're alive!
They said you'd been killed, sir.
The report was premature.
Captain, your ears. What happened?
We'll discuss it later. Mister Sulu, lay in a course for home. Mister Chekov, take the sensors. Mister Spock is still aboard the Romulan flagship. I want his body readings pinpointed and isolated. That was not a request, gentlemen.
Aye, sir.
Aye, sir.
Aye, sir.
Return to your station, Sub-commander. The boarding action on the Enterprise will begin with my command. If they resist, destroy her.
Execution of state criminals is both painful and unpleasant. I believe the details are unnecessary. The sentence will be carried out immediately after the charges have been recorded.
I demand the Right of Statement first.
You understand Romulan tradition well. The right is granted.
Thank you. I shall not require much time. No more than twenty minutes, I should say.
It should take less time than that to find your ally, who stole the cloaking device. You will not die alone. Recording the Romulan Right of Statement. Proceed, Commander Spock.
My crime is sabotage. I freely admit my guilt. (Scott is continuing to work) The oath I swore as a Starfleet officer is both specific and binding. As long as I wear the uniform, my duty is to protect the security of the Federation. Clearly, your new cloaking device is a threat to that security. I carried out my duty.
Everyone carries out his duty. You state the obvious, Spock.
There is no regulation regarding the content of my statement. May I continue?
Very well. Your twenty minutes is almost up.
Mister Chekov, there's only one Vulcan aboard that ship. He should be easy enough to locate.
Romulans and Vulcans appear to read almost exactly alike. There is just a slight difference which. Got him, sir.
Feed the co-ordinates to the transporter room on the double. Have them prepare to beam him aboard on my signal.
Captain Kirk. Mister Scott is on the intercom for you, sir.
Go ahead, Scotty.
I've got that device installed, but bless me if I know whether it'll work.
It's the biggest guess I've ever made.
Stand by, Scotty.
Sir, transporter room has the co-ordinates and is ready for beaming.
Transporter room, beam Mister Spock aboard.
Beyond the historic tradition of Vulcan loyalty, there is also the combined Romulan-Vulcan history of obedience to duty.
Transporter room reports Mister Spock aboard, sir, and the Romulan commander.
The commander?
Aye, sir.
All right. Have them report to the Bridge on the double. Mister Sulu, take us away from the Romulans. Warp factor nine.
Sub-commander, the enemy vessel is moving away at extreme speed, sir.
Alert all vessels. Weapons officer, bring main batteries to bear on the Enterprise.
Holding at warp nine, sir.
Scotty, throw the switch on that device.
I did, sir.
It's not working.
I would give you credit, Captain, for getting this far. But you will be dead in a moment and the credit would be gratuitous.
Lieutenant, open a channel to the Romulan vessel.
Aye, sir. I have Sub-commander Tal, sir.
Establish two-way visual contact.
We have you under our weapons, Enterprise. You cannot escape.
This is Captain Kirk. Hold your fire. We have your commander aboard.
Commander?
Destroy this vessel. I gave you a direct command! Tal!
Break contact!
Helmsman, flank speed. Weapons officer, stand by to fire main batteries as soon as we reach optimum range.
Scotty, we're running out of time.
Captain, I'm working as fast as I can.
You see, Captain? Your effort is being wasted.
Mister Spock, distance from the Romulan vessel?
One hundred and fifty thousand kilometres, Captain, and closing very rapidly.
Stand by, phasers. Commander, you'll forgive me if I put up a fight.
Of course. It's expected.
One hundred thousand kilometres. They should commence firing at us within the next twelve point seven seconds.
Scotty.
It's ready now, Captain, but I don't know whether our circuits can handle this alien contraption.
Throw the switch.
It'll likely overload.
Throw the switch.
Weapons officer, commence fire. (sees Enterprise disappear) Gone. They have the cloaking device! Quickly, compute enemy course from last position and open fire!
Yes, sir.
Mister Sulu, come about. Three one eight mark seven.
Three one eight mark seven, sir. Executing.
The cloaking device is working perfectly, and the commander has informed me that even the Romulan sensors cannot track a vessel so equipped.
Thank you, Mister Spock. Cancel Red Alert. We'll let you off at the nearest Federation outpost.
You are very generous, Captain. If I may be taken to your brig, I will take my place as your prisoner.
Mister Spock will have the honour of escorting you to your quarters.
Captain.
Commander.
Deck two. It is regrettable that you were made an unwilling passenger. It was not intentional. All the Federation wanted was the cloaking device.
The Federation. And what did you want?
It was my only interest when I boarded your vessel.
And that's exactly all you came away with.
You underestimate yourself, Commander.
You realise that very soon we will learn to penetrate the cloaking device you stole.
Obviously. Military secrets are the most fleeting of all. I hope that you and I exchanged something more permanent.
It was your choice.
It was the only choice possible. You would not respect any other.
It will be our secret.
Entering Neutral Zone, Captain.
Very good, Mister Chekov. Thank you, Mister Leslie.
Sickbay to Bridge.
What is it, Bones?
Well, if all the shouting's over up there, I'd like for you to report to Sickbay.
What for?
Well, you're due in surgery. I'm going to bob your ears.
Captain, please go. Somehow they do not look aesthetically agreeable
On humans.
Well, are you coming, Jim?
Or do you want to go through life looking like your First Officer?
I'm on my way.
The Paradise Syndrome
Look at those pine trees.
And that lake.
I swear that's honeysuckle I smell.
I swear that's a little orange blossom thrown in. It's unbelievable. Growth exactly like that of Earth on a planet half a galaxy away. What are the odds on such duplication?
Astronomical, Captain. The relative size, age and composition of this planet makes it highly improbable that it would evolve similarly to Earth in any way.
What in blazes is that?
Analysis, Spock.
An alien metal of some kind. An alloy resistant to probe. Readings can't even measure its age accurately. These incised symbols are fascinating. Evidently, some form of writing.
Any theories about what it is?
Negative, Captain. Structures of this complexity require extremely sophisticated building apparatus, the kind usually found in cultures surpassing or equalling our own.
Meadows and no meteor craters. The whole place is an enigma, biologically and culturally.
What's the nearest concentration of life forms, Mister Spock?
Bearing one one seven mark four.
And how much time did you say we have to investigate?
If we are to divert the asteroid which is on a collision course with this planet, we must warp out of orbit within thirty minutes. Every second we delay arriving at the deflection point compounds the problem, perhaps past solution.
You did say thirty minutes?
Yes, sir.
Then let's go. Let's find out what life forms are blessed by this environment.
Why, they look like. I'd swear they're American Indians.
They are, Doctor. A mixture of Navajo, Mohican, and Delaware, I believe. All among the more advanced and peaceful tribes.
It's like discovering Atlantis or Shangri-la. Mister Spock, is it possible there's a more evolved civilisation somewhere else on this planet, one capable of building that obelisk or developing a deflector system?
Highly improbable, Captain. Sensor probes indicate only one type of life form here.
Shouldn't we contact them, Jim? Tell them?
Tell them what? That an asteroid's coming to smash their world into atoms?
Too primitive to grasp the concept of space flight, Doctor. Our appearance here would only confuse and frighten them.
We've got a job to do. Let's get back to the Enterprise.
What's the matter, Jim?
What? Oh, nothing. It's just so peaceful, uncomplicated. No problems, no command decisions. Just living.
Typical human reaction to an idyllic natural setting. Back in the twentieth century, we referred to it as the Tahiti Syndrome. It's particularly common to over-pressured leader types, like starship captains.
Ah, the Tahiti Syndrome. Let's go take care of that asteroid. But first I want another look at that obelisk.
Doctor?
Yes.
I suggest that any further research on your part be delayed until after we have diverted the asteroid.
(standing next to the symbols) Kirk to Enterprise. (and drops suddenly out of our sight)
Yes, sir.
Spock to Enterprise.
Enterprise. Come in, Mister Spock.
Prepare to beam us up, Mister Scott. We're warping out of orbit.
Leaving? You can't be serious, Spock.
Doctor, that asteroid is almost as large as your Earth's moon. Far enough away, the angle necessary to divert it enough to avoid destruction is minute, but as the asteroid approaches this planet, the angle becomes so great that even the power of a starship
The devil with an asteroid! It won't get here for two months, Spock!
If we arrive at the deflection point in time, it may not get here at all.
In the meantime, what about Jim?
Once the asteroid has been diverted, we'll return here and resume the search.
That may be hours from now. He may be injured or dying.
(picking up two stoned to illustrate his point) Doctor, assume this is the planet we're on. This is the approaching asteroid. If we don't get to that deflection point in time, it will become physically impossible to divert this asteroid. In that case, everyone on this planet will die, including the captain.
Can a few more minutes matter, Spock?
In the time it's taken me to explain the problem, the asteroid has moved from here to here. The longer we delay, the less the likelihood of being able to divert it. Beam us up, Mister Scott.
(dazed and confused) Where am I? What place is this? What are these? (phaser and communicator) I feel should know. They're familiar and yet unfamiliar. How did I get here? Who am I? Try to remember.
Wait.
Who are you?
We are your people. We've been waiting for you to come to us.
I can't give you warp nine much longer, Mister Spock. These engines are beginning to show signs of stress.
Stress or not, we cannot reduce speed. I do not intend to miss that
Deflection point.
All right, but we're moving further into the danger range all the time.
If these circuits
Objection noted, Mister Scott. Carry on.
Miramanee has said that you appeared to her and to her handmaiden from the walls of the temple, just as our legend foretells. We do not doubt the words of our priestess, but these are troubled times, and we must be sure.
I'll answer anything I can, but as I told you, many things are strange to me.
He knows nothing of our danger. How could he save us?
It is against custom to interrupt a tribal elder at council, even for the medicine chief.
Elder, words will not save us when the skies darken. We must be certain. I say he must prove he is a god.
Our skies have darkened three times since the harvest. The last time worst of all. Our legend predicts such danger and promises that the Wise Ones who planted us here will send a god to save us, one who can rouse the temple spirit and make the sky grow quiet. Can you do this?
I came from the temple, as Miramanee said, and it was a beginning for me here. But I came from the sky, too. Only I can't remember. I can't remember.
Salish, a terrible thing has happened. The boy was attending the fishnets, and he became entangled in them and sank to the bottom of the river. Lumo brought him up quickly, but he doesn't move.
There is no sound in the body. There is no light in the eyes. He will move no more.
Wait a moment.
Wait.
He'll be all right now.
My people are grateful.
It's a simple technique. It goes way back. Way back.
Only a god can breathe life into the dead. Do you still question? Give him the medicine badge.
Deflection point minus seven.
Full power, Mister Scott.
The relays will reject the overload, Mister Spock!
Then bypass the relays and go to manual control.
We'll burn out the engines!
I want full power, Mister Scott.
Aye, sir.
All right, you lovelies. Hold together. Full power, Mister Spock.
Magnification factor twelve, Mister Sulu.
Aye, sir.
Deflection point minus four.
All engines stop. Hold position here.
All engines stop, sir.
Prepare to activate deflectors.
Aye, sir.
Power dropping, sir.
Engineering, maintain full power. Full power.
Dilithium crystal circuit's failing, sir. We'll have to replace it.
Not now.
Zero. Deflection point now, sir.
Activate deflectors.
Power dropping, sir.
Degree of deflection, Mister Sulu.
Not enough, Mister Spock. It's only point zero zero one three degrees.
Recircuit power to engines. Maximum speed heading three seven mark zero one zero.
Aye, sir.
That heading will put us directly in the asteroid's path, sir.
Correct, Mister Chekov. I intend to retreat in front of that asteroid until we can employ all power on phaser beams.
What for?
To destroy it. A narrow beam concentrated on a single spot will split that mass.
It might also cripple the ship, and we would be crushed by the asteroid.
Incorrect. We'll still be able to get out of its path by use of impulse power.
Jim won't be able to get out of its path.
That, Doctor, is another calculated risk we must take.
Miramanee. What are you doing?
I must see to the needs of the god, as is my duty.
You should be working on our ritual cloak.
There will be no ritual between us now, Salish.
What do you mean? We cannot go against tradition.
It is because of tradition that I cannot marry you.
But you are promised to me.
That was before he came.
Tribal priestess and medicine chief are always joined.
He is medicine chief now. Salish, choose another. Any maiden would be honoured to join with you.
I wish no other.
You have no choice.
Miramanee, if you could choose, would you choose me?
Perhaps you would like to bathe now.
Miramanee, tell me about the Wise Ones.
Tell? But a god knows everything.
Not this one. Tell me.
The Wise Ones brought us here from far away. They chose a medicine chief to keep the secret of the temple and to use it when the sky darkens.
Secrets of the temple.
There are no lacings. (his uniform top) How is this thing removed?
The secrets were passed on from father to son?
Yes. How does this open?
Well, why doesn't Salish use it? Why are the people in danger?
His father did not wish to share his power too soon. He died before he told Salish the secret.
Our people rejoice and wish to honour your name, but I did not know what you wish to be called. What may I tell them?
Ki, Kir
Kirok?
Have we displeased you?
No, no, everything is fine.
Then it must be ourselves, the way we live. Perhaps we have not improved as quickly as the Wise Ones wish.
Your land is rich, your people happy. Who could be displeased with that?
But there is something. Tell us. We will change it.
I can't tell you anything. All I can tell you is that I'm happy and peaceful here. I'm not sure, but I think I've never felt that way before.
Why are they so sure I can help them?
Well, you came from the stone metal. Did you not bring life to the child?
Yes, but I. I need time to remember.
Here there is much time. For everything.
Co-ordinates, Mister Chekov.
Tau eight point seven. Beta point zero four one.
That is our target. The asteroid's weakest point.
Almost dead centre, sir.
Lock all phasers on that mark. Maximum intensity, narrow beam. I want to split that fissure wide open.
You sound like you're cutting a diamond.
Very astute, Doctor.
All phasers locked, sir.
We'll fire in sequence and continue firing as long as Mister Scott can maintain power.
Standing by, sir.
Fire phasers.
Phaser one firing.
That Vulcan won't be satisfied till these panels are a puddle of lead.
Phaser two firing.
Main relay's out again, Mister Scott.
Phaser four firing. All phasers fired, sir.
Rig for simultaneous firing, Mister Sulu. Commence simultaneous bombardment.
My bairns. My poor bairns.
The ritual cloak is finished. If it pleases you, I would like to name the Joining day.
The Joining day?
I'm the daughter of the chief. Tribal law betroths me to our leader. If there is another, I will step aside.
No, Miramanee, there's no one else in my mind or my heart.
God's wish is above tribal law.
Name the Joining day.
The sooner our happiness together begins, the longer it will last. Tomorrow.
Don't ask for anymore warp nine speeds, Mister Spock. Our star drive is completely burned out. The only thing we have left is impulse power.
Estimated repair time?
Hanging here in space? Forever.
The only thing that'll fix these poor darlings is the nearest repair base.
I've already surmised that. Thank you, Mister Scott.
Well, Spock, you took your calculated risk in your calculated Vulcan way, and you lost. You lost for us, you lost for that planet, and you lost for Jim.
I accept the responsibility, Doctor.
And my responsibility is the health of this crew. You've been driving yourself too hard, and I want you to get some rest.
Mister Chekov, resume heading eight eight three mark four one.
Back to that planet? Without warp speed, it'll take months, Spock.
Exactly fifty nine point two two three days, Doctor, and that asteroid will be four hours behind us all the way.
Well then what's the use? We might not be able to save the captain even if he still is alive. We might not be able to save anything, including this ship! You haven't heard a word I've said. All you've been doing is staring at that blasted obelisk.
Another calculated Vulcan risk, Doctor.
This joining means the end of darkness.
It's a time for joy for all my people.
You will wait until I walk the holy path to the earth lodge first, to give me time to tell the priestess that you follow and that the Joining will take place.
I have found paradise. Surely no man has ever attained such happiness.
Get out of my way, Salish.
Even though you be a god, Kirok, I cannot permit this Joining.
Nobody's asking for your permission.
Then you must strike me dead.
I have no intention of striking you dead.
You bleed. You bleed, Kirok. Behold a god who bleeds! Behold a god who bleeds!
Kill me. Kill me, Kirok, for I will not rest until I prove to my people that you are no god.
I thought you were reporting to Sickbay.
There isn't time, Doctor. I must decipher those obelisk's symbols. They're a highly advanced form of cipher writing.
You've been trying to do that ever since we started back to that planet. Fifty eight days.
I'm aware of that, Doctor. I'm also aware when we arrive at the planet, we'll have barely four hours to effect rescue. I believe those symbols are the key.
Well, you won't read them by killing yourself. You've hardly eaten or slept for weeks. Now if you don't let up, you're going to collapse.
I am not hungry, Doctor. And under stress, we Vulcans can do without sleep for weeks.
Well, your Vulcan metabolism is so low it can hardly be measured, and as for the pressure, that green ice water you call blood
My physical condition is not important, Doctor. That obelisk is.
Well, my diagnosis is exhaustion brought on from overwork and guilt. You're blaming yourself for crippling this ship, just as we blamed you. Well, we were wrong. So were you. You made a command decision. Jim would have done the same. My prescription is rest, now. Do I have to call the security guards to enforce it?
Miramanee. Come here. Miramanee.
Each time your arms hold me is as joyous as the first.
I'm happy. I'm so happy. If it weren't for the dreams, my mind would be completely at peace.
I thought you no longer had the dreams, that you no longer saw the strange lodge which moves through the sky.
They've come back. They were gone for a while, but they've come back, and I see faces, too. Very dim. I feel I should know know them. I feel my place is with them, not here. I don't deserve this happiness.
I have a gift for you.
A gift? What?
It may make you happy. Wait.
These last few weeks, my love for Miramanee grows stronger with each passing day. However, the dreams return every night. Fragments of memories. I can almost get hold of them, and then
I bear your child.
You!
A canal. And with it we'll bring the water from the lake right to the lodge. And we can expand the system, and irrigate the fields and double the food supply.
And with the power of the lamp. Lamp?
Lamp.
Which turns night into day, we can cook twice as much food, and as you taught us, pre
Preserve.
Preserve.
Preserve.
Oh, no. No, no, no, no, no. That's not why I made the lamp at all, to keep you forever cooking.
It's only the wind and the thunder.
I act like a stupid child. I have nothing to fear. You are here. (she looks outside) It is time.
To go to the temple. The people will be waiting.
Why?
To save them.
But it's only the wind. The wind can't harm them.
The wind is only the beginning. Soon the sky will darken, the lake will go wild, and the earth will tremble. Only you can save us.
But I can't do anything about the wind or the sky.
If we don't go now, it will be too late. You must go inside the temple and make the blue flame come out.
I don't know how to get inside the temple.
But you are a god.
(bursting in) Kirok! Kirok!
Why are you not at the temple, Kirok? Soon the ground will begin to tremble. The people need your help.
We'll go to the caves. It'll be safe there.
The caves? Surely a legend can do more than that for his people.
When the ground trembles the caves are not safe, Kirok. If you do not rouse the temple spirit, we will all die.
There is nothing you cannot do, my husband.
Well, what do you wait for, god? Your robes?
Take care of Miramanee.
I am Kirok! I have come! I am Kirok!
I prescribed sleep.
You prescribed rest, Doctor. The symbols on the obelisk are not words. They are musical notes.
Musical notes? You mean it's nothing but a song?
In a way, yes. Other cultures, among them certain Vulcan offshoots, use musical notes as words. The tones correspond roughly to an alphabet.
Were you able to make sense our of the symbols?
Yes. The obelisk is a marker, just as I thought. It was left by a super-race known as the Preservers. They passed through the galaxy rescuing primitive cultures which were in danger of extinction and seeding them, so to speak, where they could live and grow.
I've always wondered why there were so many humanoids scattered through the galaxy.
So have I. Apparently the Preservers account for a number of them.
That's probably how the planet has survived all these centuries. The Preservers put an asteroid deflector on the planet.
Which has now become defective and is failing to operate.
And we have to find that deflector and put it back into working order, otherwise
Precisely, Doctor.
There's the false one!
No! No! Don't hurt him!
Miramanee!
Don't hurt him! He can save us!
He's false!
I belong to him.
Then go. Go die with your false god.
You'll be killed! Kill him! We're all doomed! Die, impostor! You lied to us! You're not a god! We'll kill you now!
I need Nurse Chapel.
Spock to Enterprise.
Come in, Mister Spock.
We've located the captain. Beam down Nurse Chapel with an emergency surgical kit.
My wife. Is she all right?
Wife?
Hallucinations?
Miramanee.
The nurse has given you something to ease the pain. Why were you being stoned?
Kirok could not get back into the temple.
Naturally, since he did not come from there.
I saw him come, come.
Does he recognise us?
His brain is unimpaired. Everything else is functionally normally except his memory.
It'd take time.
Time, Doctor McCoy, is the one thing we do not have in abundance. (communicator beeps) Spock here.
Tracking report, sir. Sixty five minutes to end of safety margin.
Report noted. Doctor, is he strong enough for the Vulcan mind fusion?
We have no choice.
I am Spock. You are James Kirk. Our minds are moving closer. Closer, closer, closer, James Kirk. Closer.
No!
James Kirk.
Miramanee! No! Miramanee!
Our minds are one.
I am Kir
I am Kirok! I am
Spock!
What is it?
His mind. He is an extremely dynamic individual.
It worked.
Captain, were you inside this structure?
Yes. What's inside is loaded with scientific equipment.
This obelisk is one huge deflector mechanism. It is imperative that we get inside immediately. Captain, we do not have much time.
McCoy.
I don't know how to get inside.
If we are not able to gain entry and activate the deflector mechanism within the next fifty minutes, this entire planet will be destroyed.
The key must be in these symbols. We've got to decipher them.
I already have to some extent, Captain. They are musical notes.
You mean entry can be gained by playing certain notes on a musical instrument?
That would be one method. Another would be a series of tonal qualities spoken in their proper sequence.
Give me your communicator. Tonal control, consonants and vowels. I must have hit it accidentally when I contacted the ship.
If you could remember your exact words, Captain.
(flipping open the communicator) Kirk to Enterprise.
Aye, Captain.
Scotty, if the deflector isn't activated within twenty minutes, get out of orbit. Get the Enterprise out of the danger zone. The landing party is expendable. The Enterprise isn't. Kirk out. Miramanee. Bones, stay with her. Do what you can.
It is similar to deflector panels I've seen, Captain, but far more complicated.
Careful. I must have hit something accidentally. A beam caught me and that's when I stopped remembering.
Probably a memory beam. You must have activated it out of sequence.
More symbols. Can you read them?
I do have an excellent eye for musical notes, Captain. They would seem to indicate that this series of relays activated in their proper
Spock, just press the right button.
How is she?
She had bad internal injuries, Jim.
Will she live?
No.
(in pain) Kirok. It is true. You are safe.
And so are your people, Miramanee.
I knew you would save them, my chief. When I am better, it will be as it was, will it not?
If that's what you want.
We will live long and happy lives. I will bear you many strong sons. I'll love you always.
And I'll love you, Miramanee. Always.
Each kiss is as the first. (she dies)
And The Children Shall Lead
Professor Starnes? (the man has a phaser, and looks terrified.) It's Kirk.
He's dead, Captain.
He didn't seem to know me.
Cyalodin.
Self-inflicted.
Must destroy ourselves! Alien upon us. The enemy from within. The enemy!
All this. Self-inflicted. Mass suicide.
You missed me.
I did not.
Hi. Who are you?
Kirk of the starship Enterprise.
I'm Tommy Starnes. This is Mary, Steve, Ray, and Don.
Come on. Play with us. Come on. (They make a circle and dance around Kirk.) Ring around the rosy, pocket full of posy. Ashes, ashes, we all fall down! Ring around the rosy, pocket full of posy. Ashes, ashes, we all fall down!
Let's go and play.
No sign of grief?
No, Jim. No indication of any kind.
Or of fear.
They seem completely secure and unafraid.
And you insist their behaviour indicates traumatic shock?
I don't insist, Jim, but I can't dismiss the possibility.
A child suppresses the fact that both parents are dead? I can't believe it.
Humans do have an amazing capacity for believing what they choose and excluding that which is painful.
Not these children, to this extent. It's incredible.
What those children saw is incredible, Jim. The way those deaths occurred, any reaction is possible including lacunar amnesia. That's my diagnosis. Until specific tests can be made, it remains that.
I'll be guided by that opinion, Doctor, for the present. What about questioning them?
Not until the fabric of the traumatisation weakens or you come up with another explanation for their behaviour. Forcing them to see this experience now could cause permanent damage.
Accepted, Doctor.
Careful.
I'm, I'm sorry, Captain Kirk.
Children. Children, listen to me. It's late and it's time to go up to the ship.
Oh, not yet.
But we're just beginning to have fun.
I'm sorry. I'm sorry. You'll go up with the doctor.
Come on. It's time to be going.
Whatever happened here is locked up inside those children.
The attack on Professor Starnes' party must surely have been unprovoked.
Attack? Mass suicide is what it seems to be.
I stand corrected, Captain. Induced would be a more precise term. Induced by an outside force.
Such as?
The release of bacteria. Or a helpless mental depression and a state of suicidal anxiety could have been chemically induced.
What would make the children immune?
I do not know, but it is possible.
Then the children would have been exempted by conscious design.
A valid assumption, I would say.
An attack by an unknown assailant on an uninhabited planet. This planet is uninhabited, Mister Spock, to the best of our information?
At present, yes. (his tricorder beeps) Odd.
Getting a reading?
There seems to be some disturbance coming from that cave.
Picking up any life-forms, Mister Spock?
Definitely not humanoid, Captain. Impossible to make any specific identification. The readings do not correlate with any known information.
(shivers) Oh, that's strange. That's very strange. I'm getting a feeling of anxiety in this place. It doesn't sound very scientific, does it? But it's strongest right here.
I'm not aware of it, Captain.
Maybe that's what's registering on your tricorder.
I am not familiar with anxiety, but I wasn't aware it could be registered on sensors.
No, of course. That's, that's me. That's me. But what's causing your tricorder to react?
Are you all right, Captain?
Yes, I'm fine. I'm fine. Just some sympathetic vibration with what happened here. Let's get back to the ship. I want to check out those tapes from Professor Starnes' tricorder. And I am going to question those children.
All right, children. Each card is a different flavour. You take your pick, and the computer will mix your favourite combination. Now, what would you like? Call out your favourites.
Vanilla! Chocolate! Cherry! Banana!
Well, would you like a surprise, Stevie?
(he gets his ice cream) It's coconut and vanilla. They're both white.
There, there now, Stevie. There are unpleasant surprises as well as pleasant ones. That was your unpleasant surprise. Now, what would you like for your pleasant surprise?
Chocolate wobble and pistachio.
Well, coming right up.
And peach.
All right. It's going to be a wonderful surprise.
The tests show no evidence of tensions due to lying. They behave as though nothing had gone wrong. They check out sound physically. There are no signs of any foreign biochemical substances to account for their present state. I have no answers, Jim.
There has to be an answer.
Well, can't it wait till we get to a Starbase hospital so they can be checked out by child specialists?
We're not leaving here until we find out what went on or what's going on.
Well, I won't prevent you questioning them, but it could harm the children if you do.
It could be far worse for them if I don't, and for us too.
Be careful.
After this, we can all play games.
How do you like getting ice cream out of a computer?
That was fun.
Well, well, well. You're all having such a good time, I think I'll join you. Is that all right?
Please do.
I'll have a dish, too.
Oh, of course.
A little one. A very small one. It's better than Triacus, isn't it?
That dirty old planet?
Yeah?
You weren't there very long. You don't know.
I don't think your parents liked it very much either.
Yes, they did.
Yeah. Mine sure did.
Parents like stupid things.
Oh, I don't know about that. Parents like children.
Ha. That's what you think.
I'm sure your parents loved you. That's why they took you with them to Triacus. So they wouldn't be so far away from you for such a long time. That would make them very unhappy and miss you. I'm sure that you would miss them, too.
Busy, busy.
Busy. Busy. Busy! Busy!
Guess what we are.
I know. A swarm of bees.
Watch out. Watch out. I'll sting you.
Now wait a minute.
Can we have some more ice cream, please?
No, I don't think so. It'll spoil your dinner.
See what I told you? They all say it.
Yeah.
All right, children, you've had a busy day. I think you could use some rest. Nurse Chapel will see you to your quarters.
Very good idea, Captain.
Aw, do we have to?
Tommy, Just a moment. I'd like to ask you a question. Come and sit down. Tommy, will you tell me what you saw?
Saw where?
In the cave, on the planet. On Triacus.
You were there.
Did you see your father today?
I saw him.
Did he seem upset?
Yeah, he was very upset.
What about?
I didn't ask him.
What was going on that would have upset him?
How should I know? He was always upset, just like you, Captain Kirk.
I'm not upset with you, Tommy, or your friends. We invited you aboard the Enterprise. Why would I do that if I didn't like you?
You have your reasons.
Aren't you unhappy about leaving Triacus?
That place? That's for adults.
Aren't you upset about leaving your parents?
My parents? They love it down there. Always busy. (he nearly chokes up) They're happy. Can I go now? I'm tired too, you know.
Yes, certainly. I'll take you.
I know the way.
Kirk to security. Post a guard on the children. They're to be kept under constant watch.
Hail, hail, fire and snow. Call the angel, we will go. Far away, for to see, friendly Angel come to me. Hail, hail, fire and snow. Call the angel, we will go. Far away, for to see, friendly Angel come to me. Hail, hail
(echoy voice) You have done very well, my friends. You have done what must be done. You have come aboard the Enterprise. Now our destination is a Federation settlement. Captain Kirk will undoubtedly choose a closer station. Do not let that deter you. Marcos Twelve has millions of people on it. Nearly a million will join us as our friends. The rest will be our enemies. Together with our other friends who will join us, we will defeat our enemies as we defeated them on Triacus. A million friends on Marcos will make us invincible. No one will tell us where to go, when to sleep, where to eat. The universe will be mine to command, yours to play in. To accomplish this great mission, we must first control the Enterprise. To control the ship, we first must control the crew. You know how to do that. That is your next task. And as you believe, so shall you do, so shall you do. As you believe, so shall you do, so shall you do. As you believe, so shall you do, so shall you do.
Maintaining standard orbit, Captain.
Lieutenant Uhura, any report from the planet security team?
Everything is quiet, sir.
(enters) Captain, I have extracted the salient portion of Professor Starnes' tapes.
Good.
Among the technical facts he gathered, Professor Starnes also offered some rather unscientific hypotheses.
Let's see them.
Log date 5025.3. Ever since our arrival on Triacus, I've felt a certain growing feeling of uneasiness. At first I attributed it to the usual case of nerves associated with any new project. However, I've found that the rest of my associates are also bothered by these anxieties. The only ones not affected are the children Bless them, they find the whole thing an exciting adventure. Ah, to be young again.
Let's see some more of these unscientific hypotheses, Mister Spock.
(tense) 5032.4. The feeling of anxiety we've all been experiencing is growing worse.
There is another portion, Captain, which I believe you'll find particularly interesting.
5038.3. Professor Wilkins finished his excavation today. Although whatever civilisation that might have been here was destroyed by some natural catastrophe, it would appear that one of the race took refuge in the cave. (Tommy enters the Bridge) And, for our efforts, we are becoming only more apprehensive. (Tommy clenches his fist) As if some unseen force were influencing us.
What happened?
Unknown.
I didn't see you come in, Tommy.
Captain, after we leave here, can you take us to Marcos Twelve?
No. We'll probably take you to a Federation Starbase.
But I have relatives on Marcos Twelve.
I'm sorry, Tommy. Marcos Twelve is not within our patrol area. Mister Spock, we'll pursue this in my quarters.
Captain, can I stay here and watch? I'll be very quiet.
All right, Tommy. Lieutenant, have Doctor McCoy report to my quarters for a brief conference. Mister Leslie?
Hi there.
Hi.
What is that?
(blissfully unaware of reality) The planet Triacus.
Will we see that all the time we stay here?
Yes, we will. All the time we're here.
He sees Triacus on the screen.
He thinks he sees it.
(seeing reality) Mister Sulu, the screen. We're out of orbit.
Very soon.
When did we change course?
We haven't changed course.
What do you mean, we haven't changed course? Look at your bridge control monitor.
We're still in orbit, sir.
Have you gone completely blind? That's not orbiting position.
Don't touch the controls, sir.
What the devil do you think you're doing?
We must remain in this orbit till the bridge orders a change.
You blind fool! Can't you see in front of you? We're not in orbit.
I will not disobey an order from the bridge.
You are disobeying an order from the bridge. Now step aside.
You're losing control of yourself.
Not yet.
I'm being influenced to do things that do not make sense. I even went so far as to call Starfleet Command to request a spaceship to be used as a transport. It was only when I couldn't tell them what I wanted to transport that I began to realise that my mind was being directed. I decided to send a dispatch to Starfleet, warning them. God forgive us. Must destroy ourselves! Alien upon us. The enemy from within. The enemy!
He never completed the entry, and the dispatch was never sent. Except for scenes of family life, games and picnics with the children, that is the complete record. Whatever overwhelmed them must have done so with incredible speed. Otherwise, the professor would have provided details of the experience. He was an excellent scientist and tireless in his pursuit of the truth.
That could be what destroyed him.
Possible, Captain. Evil does seek to maintain power by suppressing the truth.
Or by misleading the innocent.
Misleading the innocent? I wonder.
Do you mean the children may be involved?
Yes, Doctor. Spock what do we know about the race that lived here?
According to the legend, Triacus was the seat of a band of marauders who made constant war throughout the system of Epsilon Indi. After many centuries, the destroyers were themselves destroyed by those they had preyed upon.
Is that the end of it?
No, like so many legends, this one too has a frightening ending. It warns that the evil is awaiting a catalyst to set it again into motion and send it marauding across the galaxy.
Is it possible that the evil found the catalyst?
I was speaking of a legend, Captain.
But most legends have their basis in fact, Spock.
I think I read you, Jim, but as medical officer I must warn you that unless the normal grief is tapped and released from these children, you are treading dangerously.
I understand your diagnosis, Doctor, and I'll respect it. But not to the exclusion and safety of the Enterprise. Thank you.
Spock, what other expeditions have visited Triacus?
According to Federation records, this is the first.
What was it Professor Starnes said about the unseen force?
He said an unseen force was influencing him, that he recognised it, was beginning to fight it and cancelled his request for a ship.
A ship. Yes, a ship for Triacus. But why? By whom? (into comm.) Security detachment. Ready for relief duty on Triacus. Assemble in the transporter room immediately. I'll have some questions for that planet detachment as soon as they're beamed up. I think it's about time we found out whether Professor Starnes' enemy within is on the planet below or here onboard ship with us. Come on.
Your tour of duty will last one hour. Be prepared with your communicators at all times to report any alien beings. Don't wait to investigate.
Beam up the security detachment from Triacus. (no one appears) Spock? What's wrong?
I am unable to lock on to the proper co-ordinates.
Why not?
It appears we are no longer orbiting Triacus.
That's impossible. If we're not orbiting Triacus, then the men I beamed down are dead.
Captain, we are no longer orbiting Triacus.
Activate the bridge monitor screen.
Captain to Bridge.
Mister Sulu, we're not orbiting Triacus.
With all respects, Captain, you're wrong. I have Triacus on my screen now.
You're off course. I'm coming right up.
Hail, hail, fire and snow. Call the angel, we will go. Far away, far to see, friendly Angel come to me.
Sulu!
Fire and snow. Call the angel, we will go. Far away, far to see, friendly Angel come to me.
Friends we have reached a moment of crisis. The enemy have discovered our operation, but they are too late. They no longer control the ship. We do. We shall prevail. They will take us any place we desire. Go back to your stations. Maintain your controls. If resistance mounts, call upon their beast. Their beast will serve us well. The fear in each one of them is the beast which will consume him. Remember how it was on Triacus. If they resist, so shall it be on the Enterprise. If you need me, call and I will appear. Our new goal is Marcos Twelve. It is our new beginning. We must not falter.
Go to your stations. Mary, you remain here with me.
Helmsman, disregard what you see on the screen, what you think you see on the screen. Set a course for Starbase Four.
Helmsman, did you hear me?
Yes, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, contact Starbase Four. Tell them we're bringing the children there. Tell Starfleet Command I suspect them of being alien in nature, and I want a thorough investigation made upon our arrival.
Aye, aye, sir.
Lieutenant, what are you staring at?
I see my death. A long death. Disease and pain. I see my death.
Lieutenant, there's nothing there.
Oh, God. Captain, don't let it be.
Mister Spock, you make the call to Starfleet. Mister Sulu, I ordered you to change course. Mister Sulu
Captain, stay away from the controls! If you touch them, we'll be destroyed.
Mister Sulu, there's nothing there.
Captain, why are we bothering Starfleet?
That was an order, Spock.
This bridge is under complete control.
Complete?
There is no need.
Take a look around you.
I cannot obey your order, Captain.
Take Mister Sulu to his quarters. He is relieved of duty.
Confine them to quarters. Did you hear me? Did you hear me?
Captain, we must get off this bridge.
Yes, we must. I'm losing command. I'm losing my ability to command. I'm losing the Enterprise.
I'm losing command. I'm losing the Enterprise. The ship is sailing on and on. I'm alone. Alone. Alone. I'm losing command.
Captain.
I've lost command. I've lost the Enterprise.
Jim.
I've got command. I've got command. I've got command.
Correct, Captain.
Where to, Captain?
Auxiliary control, my Vulcan friend. This ship is off course.
Scotty. I want you to override the bridge navigation system and plot a course for Starbase Four.
I can't do that, sir.
Why not?
These are very sensitive instruments. I will not have you upset their delicate balance. We would all be lost, forever lost. (Spock sees Don) Go away now. Go away or we'll kill you.
Scotty, listen to me. The Enterprise has been invaded by alien beings. Its destination is Marcos. If we take it there, millions will die the way they died at Triacus.
No, I'm all right, Spock. My beast is finished. It won't return.
Captain, so long as the children are present, there is danger. They are the carriers.
Spock, they're not the alien beings. They're children being misled.
They are followers. Without followers, evil cannot spread.
They're children.
Captain, the four hundred and thirty men and women on board the Enterprise and the ship itself are endangered by these children.
They don't understand the evil that they're doing.
Perhaps that is true, but the evil that is within them is spreading fast, and unless we can find a way to remove it
We'll have to kill them.
What is it, Ensign?
I have been instructed to place you and Mister Spock under arrest.
By whose order?
Starfleet Command, sir.
Where did you hear this order, Ensign? Now, listen to me. This order is false. I want you and your men to return to their stations.
I'm sorry, but I must insist you and Mister Spock come with me to the detention section.
Ensign, listen to me.
(drawing his phaser) Do not force me to kill you, sir. I will if I have to. Will you come peacefully, Captain?
Ensign, listen to me. This is a false order, Ensign.
I have never disobeyed an order, Captain. You know I have never
I know that, Ensign. You have never disobeyed an order, but an alien being is aboard this ship.
I will not disobey now! I cannot disobey!
Ensign, listen to me. You will disobey this order!
Enough. Take these men to detention then join me on the bridge.
The Enterprise will never reach Marcos Twelve. We will not be landing there.
The crew will take us. The crew believes.
The crew does not understand. When we make them understand as I understand, they won't take you to Marcos.
They will! They will!
We are going to Marcos! We are going to follow our friend!
Your friend? Where is your friend? Where is that stowaway? Why does he hide?
He will come if we call him.
But we won't. We don't need him. We're not afraid of you.
Good. I'm glad you're not afraid of me. (Takes his seat) But your leader is afraid. What's he afraid of?
He's not afraid of anybody.
He's not afraid of anything.
He's afraid to be seen. And when the crew sees and hears him, they'll understand that he is not their friend, and they won't follow him.
He is our friend.
Then let him show himself. Bring him out! Let him prove to me that he is my friend and I'll follow him to Marcos Twelve and to the ends of the universe!
No!
Mister Spock, playback the chant the children sang to summon up the Gorgan.
Hail, hail, fire and snow. Call the angel, we will go. Far away, for to see, friendly Angel come to me. Hail, hail, fire and snow. Call the angel, we will go. (The other children enter the bridge.) Far away, for to see, friendly Angel come to me.
The time has come to see the world as it is. Come on.
Who has summoned me?
I did, Gorgan. My beast is gone. It lost its power in the light of reality. I command again, and I ordered you here.
No, Captain. I command here. My followers are strong and faithful and obedient. That's why we take what is ours wherever we go.
You take from those who do not know you.
And we know you.
Then you know I must win, Captain.
Not if we join together to fight you.
Foolish. You will be destroyed. I would ask you to join me, but you are gentle, and that is a grave weakness.
We're also very strong.
Ah, but your strength is cancelled by your gentleness. You are full of goodness. Such as you cannot be changed. You are like the parents. You must be eliminated.
Children, I have pictures of some of you on Triacus. I'd like to show them to you. Would you like to see them? Mister Spock, the pictures.
I forbid it.
Why should you fear it?
I fear nothing.
So we were told. Mister Spock, the pictures. The children are waiting.
They would not help transport us. They were against us. They had to be eliminated.
Tommy's father would have destroyed you, but he recognised you too late.
You are also too late. The kind ones always are.
Not always, Gorgan. Not this time. You can't hide from them. They see you as we see you. They know what you are. Even the children learn.
You are my future generals. Together we can raise armies of followers. Go to your posts! The first great victories are upon us. You will see. We have millions of friends on Marcos Twelve. We shall exterminate all who oppose us! Our purity of purpose cannot be contaminated by those who disagree, who will not co-operate, who do not understand. They must be annihilated.
Don't be afraid. Look at him. Without you children, he's nothing. The evil remains within him.
I command you! I command you! To your posts! Carry out your duties, or I will destroy you! You will be swept aside to make way for the strong.
Look how ugly he really is. Look at him and don't be afraid.
Death. Death to you all. Death to you all. Death to you all. Death to you all.
It's all right.
They're crying, Jim. I don't know how it happened, but it's good to see.
It's all right, Mary. It's all right. It's all right, isn't it, Doctor?
Yes. It's all right. We can help them now.
Marcos Twelve dead ahead, sir.
Reverse course, Mister Sulu.
Aye, sir.
Course reversed, Captain.
Set course for Starbase Four, Mister Sulu.
Yes, sir.
Is There In Truth No Beauty?
Mister Marvick. I am James Kirk, the Captain.
Captain, what are you doing here? You'll have to leave before the Medusan ambassador arrives.
Yes, everything will be taken care of. This is Mister Spock, my First Officer.
Montgomery Scott, Chief Engineer. Call me Scotty.
Mister Spock, do you have the visor? You must be sure to wear it. Humans who get even a glimpse of Medusans have gone insane.
Thank you, Mister Marvick. I shall be wearing the visor.
We mustn't keep the ambassador waiting. If you'll go with Mister Scott, I'm sure the two of you will have a great deal in common.
Aye, indeed. It's a rare privilege meeting one of the designers of the Enterprise.
Lieutenant Uhura, open a channel to transporter control centre on the planet.
Aye, sir.
This is Captain Kirk. Inform the ambassador and Doctor Jones we're ready to beam them aboard. Kirk out. Are you sure this visor will work?
It has proved effective for Vulcans.
It's your human half I'm worried about.
I shall endeavour to keep it under control.
Inform me when transport is complete.
Welcome aboard, Ambassador Kollos. I am First Officer Spock.
I'm Doctor Jones. (Spock removes his visor) The ambassador is most honoured to meet you, Mister Spock.
Captain Kirk, we are ready.
Lieutenant Uhura, open a channel to all decks.
Channel open, sir.
This is Captain Kirk to all ship's personnel. Clearance plans now in effect.
Clear passageways immediately. The Ambassador will be escorted to his quarters at once.
Doctor Jones, may I congratulate you on your assignment with Ambassador Kollos.
Thank you, but the assignment's not yet definite. It will depend upon my ability to achieve a true mind-link with the Ambassador.
I'm sure you will find it a fascinating experience.
I wasn't aware that anyone had ever achieved a mind-link with the Medusans.
No one ever has. I was referring to mind-links I had attempted with members of other species.
I've heard, Mister Spock, that you turned down the assignment with the Ambassador.
I was unable to accept. My life is here.
Spock to Bridge. We have arrived at the Ambassador's quarters.
Thank you, Mister Spock. Notify all hands to return to stations. All right, let's take her out. Warp factor two.
Warp factor two, sir.
I would appreciate an opportunity to exchange greetings with the Ambassador.
I'm sure the Ambassador would be charmed.
I almost envy you your assignment.
I see in your mind that you are tempted to take my place.
Not correct, Doctor, although I am aware of your mind attempting to contact mine. Were you born a telepath?
Yes. That is why I had to study on Vulcan.
I understand. May I show you to your quarters?
I think I'll stay here a bit. Ambassador Kollos often finds the process of transport somewhat unsettling.
I understand. Our ship's surgeon often makes the same complaint. Do call when you are ready.
What is it he sees when he looks at you? I must know!
I can't understand why they let you go with Kollos.
They, Captain?
The male population of the Federation. Didn't someone try and talk you out of it?
Now that you ask, yes.
Well, I'm glad he didn't succeed. Otherwise, I wouldn't have met you.
Thank you, Captain.
Tell me, Doctor Jones. Why isn't it dangerous for you to be with Kollos? Spock I can understand. Nothing makes an impression on him.
Why, thank you, Captain.
You're very welcome, Mister Spock. But no human can look at Kollos, even with a visor, without going mad. How do you manage?
I spent four years on Vulcan studying their mental discipline.
You poor girl.
On the contrary, Doctor, I would say that Doctor Jones was indeed fortunate.
Vulcan is not my idea of fun.
Joy can be many things, Doctor. On Vulcan, I learned to do things impossible to learn anywhere else.
To read minds?
How not to read them, Captain.
I don't understand.
Doctor Jones was born a telepath, Captain.
Oh.
Vulcan was necessary to my sanity.
What most humans generally find impossible to understand is the need to shut out the bedlam of other people's thoughts and emotions.
Well, I doubt that Mister Spock would don the most revered of all Vulcan symbols merely to annoy you, Doctor Jones.
As a matter of fact, I wear it this evening to honour you, Doctor.
Indeed?
Yes, very interesting. I might even say fascinating, but back to your mission. Doctor, do you feel any way may be found to employ Medusan navigators on starships? It would certainly solve many of our navigational problems.
The key is the mind-link that I learned on Vulcan. Once we have learned the technique of forming a corporate intelligence with the Medusans, the designers, that's where Larry comes in, can work on adapting instruments.
I don't care how benevolent the Medusans are supposed to be. Isn't it suicidal to deal with something ugly enough to drive men mad? Why do you do it?
I see, Doctor McCoy, you still subscribe to the outmoded notion, promulgated by your ancient Greeks, that what is good must also be beautiful.
And the reverse, of course, that what is beautiful is automatically expected to be good.
Yes, I think most of us are attracted by beauty and repelled by ugliness. One of the last of our prejudices. At the risk of sounding prejudiced, gentlemen, here's to beauty. (they stand for the toast) To Miranda Jones, the loveliest human ever to grace a starship.
How can one so beautiful condemn herself to look upon ugliness the rest of her life? Will we allow it, gentlemen?
Certainly not.
How can one so full of joy and the love of life as you, Doctor, condemn yourself to look upon disease and suffering for the rest of your life? Can we allow that, gentlemen?
To whatever you want the most, Miranda.
Some more Antarean brandy? (seeing her far-away look) What is it?
There's somebody nearby thinking of murder.
In this room?
It's gone now.
Who is it? Can you tell?
It isn't there anymore. Captain, would you mind if I said goodnight?
Of course. Perhaps I'll see
I'll escort you to your quarters.
Thank you, gentlemen. You make a choice impossible. Please, stay and enjoy yourselves. It was a delightful dinner.
Sleep well, Miranda.
Are you sure you're well enough to find your way alone?
Of course, Doctor McCoy. Please don't worry about me.
Now, where I come from, that's what we call a lady.
Yes, she is something special.
Very special. I suggest you treat her accordingly. I've known Doctor Jones long enough to be aware of her remarkable gifts. Well, it's been a long day for me.
Larry, would you like to stop off at Engineering with me? I have a few things to check and a bottle of scotch says you can't handle the controls you designed.
Some other time.
Good night, gentlemen.
Good night, Scotty. You dressed up for the occasion, Spock. Very impressive.
I genuinely intended to honour her, Captain. Good evening, gentlemen.
Good evening. Sleep well.
Bones, what's troubling you with the girl?
Well, she's not just another girl, Captain. Don't make that mistake.
I didn't think that for a moment. What else?
I don't know what it is, exactly. She seems very vulnerable.
We're all vulnerable in one way or another.
Of course. But there's something so very disturbing about her.
Meaning she's quite a woman. I agree.
Good night, Jim.
Good night, Bones.
Miranda?
Who is it?
Larry. I've got to talk to you.
It's late.
Please, Miranda, it's important.
All right. Come in, then.
I thought the dinner was never going to end.
I rather enjoyed it.
Yes, I know you did. I didn't. You were so far away.
I'll be further away than that soon.
Please don't talk of that. There's so little time. Please, Miranda, don't go with Kollos.
Now, we've been over this time and time again.
Don't I know it. I've asked you in restaurants, in the laboratory, on one knee, on both knees. Miranda, how can you do this?
Larry, please, try to understand.
I understand that you're a woman and that I'm a man, one of your own kind, and that Kollos will never be able to give you anything like this. (he kisses her but she doesn't respond) Why did I ever meet you?
I've been honest with you. I simply cannot love you the way you want me to.
Miranda.
And I'm going away with Kollos. That's final. I think you'd better leave now.
So it's you! I didn't know that it was you before. Who is it you want to kill, Larry? Is it me? You mustn't keep this to yourself. I want to help you.
So now you want to help me. Now I know what a mere human male has to do to get a reaction out of you. Make you think he's a patient. The great psychologist. Why don't you try being a woman for a change?
Miranda!
Where's Mister Scott?
Miranda?
Miranda!
Ah, there, Marvick. So you couldn't resist a wee wager.
Has the Ambassador been hurt?
No harm has come to the Ambassador, Captain.
Who could have done such a thing?
Larry Marvick.
Larry Marvick? Why?
Do you know whether he saw the Medusan?
Yes, he did.
Then insanity will surely be the result, Captain. Dangerous insanity.
The controls are all yours, and the bottle of scotch'll be in your room this evening if you can handle 'em.
Captain Kirk to all ship personnel. Red Alert. An attempt was made to murder Ambassador Kollos. The murderer is dangerously insane. He is Lawrence Marvick. Be on the watch for him. Kirk out.
Explain, Lieutenant Sulu.
I don't believe this myself, Captain, but we're travelling at warp factor eight point five.
And accelerating.
Get engineering, Uhura.
They don't answer, Captain.
Warp factor nine and accelerating.
Can't you disengage power from there, Mister Spock?
Trying, Captain. Mister Chekov, your assistance, please.
Captain, I have engineering now.
Put them on intercom.
We mustn't sleep! They come in your dreams! That's the worst! They suffocate in your dreams! We're making it out of here!
Security to engineering.
I'll go with you.
No.
I must. I can reach his mind.
We'll be safe at the boundaries of the universe! We'll be safe!
Scotty, where are we?
I don't know!
Beyond the boundaries of the galaxy. We made it. We're safe. We're safe, Captain Kirk.
Bones.
Oh, no. No! No, Captain. We mustn't sleep. No! No! No, they come in your dreams. That's the worst. They suffocate in your dreams. No!
All right. All right.
No.
We'll take you to a place to hide.
No.
Yes, Larry. I'm here.
I didn't lose you. Oh, my beautiful love, I thought I'd lost you.
I am here, Larry. No. I can see what he sees. No, don't. Don't think of it!
Liar! Liar! Deceiver! You're not alone! You brought it with you. It's here. It's here. You brought it with you! Liar! Liar! Liar! (he tries to strangle Miranda) Don't love her! Don't love her! She'll kill you if you love her! I love you, Miranda.
He's dead, Jim.
Where are we?
We are evidently far outside our own galaxy, judging from the lack of traceable reference points. When we exceeded warp speed factor nine point five, we apparently entered a space-time continuum.
I have the autopsy report on Marvick. Heart action stopped, cause unknown. Respiration stopped, cause unknown. Brain activity stopped, cause. Shall I go on?
You mean he just simply died.
I mean he evidently could not live with what he saw.
Or what he felt. Damage report, Scotty?
We need some repairs, sir, but the ship is intact.
Position report, Mister Spock.
Impossible to calculate. We lack data to analyse. Our instruments appear to be functioning normally, but what they tell us makes no sense. Our records are clear up to the point at which we left our galaxy.
Then we should be able to navigate back.
Unfortunately, we lack reference points on which to plot a return course. We experienced extreme sensory distortion, and we shall do so again if we attempt to use warp speed. And we cannot re-cross the barrier using sub light speed.
A madman got us into this, and it's beginning to look as if only a madman can get us out.
An entertaining suggestion, Mister Chekov, but not very helpful.
Very possibly. The Medusan sensory system is radically different from ours. Perhaps for the purpose of this emergency I might become Kollos.
Explain.
A fusion. A mind-link to create a double entity. Each of us would enjoy the knowledge and sensory capabilities of both. We will function as one being.
Hazards?
If the link is successful there will be a tendency to lose separate identity. A necessary risk. Of course, Doctor Jones will not wish to give me permission to accomplish the mind-link.
I don't think she'll want anyone to intrude in the kind of rapport she has with Kollos.
Doctor Jones has shown reluctance every time I've asked to converse with Kollos. In some ways, she is still most human, Captain, particularly in the depth of her jealousy.
I could confine her to quarters.
Not sufficient. Her telepathic powers are formidable. If it is at all possible, her mind must be so engaged that no thought of what I am doing shall intrude.
I think that could be arranged.
I may be sentimental, but this is my favourite place. Earth.
I've never been to Earth. What lovely flowers. May I touch them?
Certainly.
They have no scent.
Try these.
Let me see. It's just a thorn. I was hoping to make you forget about this today.
It doesn't hurt anymore.
You mustn't blame yourself because Marvick loved you.
I didn't want his love. I couldn't return it.
But someday, you will want human love and companionship.
Shall I tell you what human companionship means to me? A struggle, a defence against the emotions of others. At times, the emotions burst in on me. Hatred, desire, envy, pity. Pity is the worst of all. I agree with the Vulcans. Violent emotion is a kind of insanity.
Are you willing to spend the rest of your life with the Medusans in order to avoid human emotion?
Perhaps.
A meeting of minds is all very well, but what about love, Miranda? You're young, attractive and human. Sooner or later, no matter how beautiful their minds are, you're going to yearn for someone who looks like yourself, someone who isn't ugly.
Ugly. What is ugly? Who is to say whether Kollos is too ugly to bear or too beautiful to bear?
Miranda, I meant no insult. Please. Here we are among the roses. A very romantic setting. I wish there were moonlight, too. Moonlight would suit you very well.
I see you're a very complicated man.
Kollos, no. You mustn't let him!
Miranda, don't.
Let me go. You have no idea what a dangerous thing Spock is planning. We must stop him! Let me go!
The Enterprise is at stake. It is not possible for you to be involved.
Why? I've already committed myself to mind-link when Kollos and I reach the Medusan vessel. Why put yourself in jeopardy?
This is not a duty that you can assume. I am aware of the fact that your telepathic competence might be superior to mine, but there's a more important factor. The object is to pilot this ship. That is something you cannot do.
Then teach me to operate the ship. I can memorise instantly.
Now wait a minute. I realise that you can do almost anything a sighted person can do, but you can't pilot a starship.
What?
Fascinating.
I'm sorry, Miranda, but you must be realistic. You are blind, and there are some things you simply cannot do.
Evidently a highly sophisticated sensor web. My compliments to you, and to your dressmaker.
Yes, of course. It's the only reasonable explanation. You can't see and Kollos can't hurt you.
An elegant solution. but I fail to understand why you apparently try to conceal your blindness, Doctor Jones.
I think I understand. You said it. Pity is the worst of all.
Pity, which I hate. Do you think you can gather more information with your eyes than I can with my sensors? I could play tennis with you, Captain Kirk. I might even beat you. I am standing exactly one metre, four centimetres from the door. Can you judge distance that accurately? I can even tell you how fast your heart is beating.
No, that won't be necessary. Mister Spock will make the mind-link. No other decision is possible.
No. I won't let you.
Please. Do not fight us like this, Doctor Jones. I appeal to you as a colleague. Do not oppose us.
No.
If we can't persuade you, there is someone who can. You'll have to take this up with Kollos. For your own sake.
Bones, why hadn't you told me?
She would have told you herself if she had wanted you to know. I respect her privacy.
Yes, there's a great deal to respect about that lady.
It seems I have no choice but to obey you.
This is delightful. I know you. All of you. James Kirk, Captain and friend for many years. And Leonard McCoy, also of long acquaintance. And Uhura, whose name means freedom. She walks in beauty, like the night.
That's not Spock.
Are you surprised to find that I've read Byron, Doctor?
That's Spock!
Am I addressing the Ambassador?
In part. That is, part of us is known to you as Kollos. Ah, Miranda. There you are. O brave new world, that has such creatures in it.
'Tis new to thee.
My world is next for us. Captain Kirk, I speak for all of us you call Medusans. I am sorry for the trouble I've brought to your ship.
We don't hold you to blame for what happened, and thank you now for your help.
And now to the business at hand. With your permission, Captain.
Yes. Mister Sulu, release the helm to Mister Spock.
Aye, sir.
Co-ordination is completed.
Then go ahead, Mister Spock.
Warp one in six seconds. Five, four, three, two, one, zero.
Position report, please, Mister Chekov.
Our position? Our position is so close to the point where we entered the void, the difference isn't worth mentioning. Bull's-eye, Mister Spock.
Thank you, Mister Chekov. Manoeuvre completed, Captain.
Take over, Mister Sulu. Thank you, Ambassador. Mister Chekov, plot a new course.
The new headings will be plotted in a minute, sir.
How compact your bodies are. And what a variety of senses you have. This thing you call language though, most remarkable. You depend on it for so very much. But is any one of you really its master? But most of all, the aloneness. You are so alone. You live out your lives in this shell of flesh. Self-contained, separate. How lonely you are. How terribly lonely.
Ambassador, you must dissolve the link.
So soon?
There must be no delay.
You're a wise Captain.
Captain.
Spock! Don't look! Cover your eyes!
Don't move!
But, Jim.
No one is to move. Spock? Are you all right?
He's hardly breathing. Help me get him to Sickbay.
Unless Miranda can look down into his mind and turn it outward to us, we will lose Spock.
(pacing) Vulcan mind techniques. They seem so untrustworthy now that Spock's life is at stake.
Her knowledge of them may be the only thing that could save Spock's sanity, perhaps even his life.
But does she want to? She's been in there so long.
There's nothing else to be done.
She tried to help Marvick. Marvick is dead.
That's different. Marvick loved her.
And Spock is her rival. Is that any better? Even Spock felt the violence of her jealousy.
But they weren't rivals in love. Jim, you shouldn't go in there.
Whatever happens, Bones, don't interfere.
Who is it? Doctor McCoy? Who's there?
Captain Kirk.
I have no news for you, Captain.
No change?
Only that his life processes are ebbing.
What are you doing about it?
Why, what I can, of course.
Which doesn't seem to be much.
No doubt you think I can wake him with a kiss.
It's worth a try, isn't it? After all, he's not a machine.
But he is a Vulcan.
Only half. The other half is human. Far more human than you, apparently.
Face reality, Captain. His mind has gone down almost too far even for me to reach!
If you don't reach him soon, he'll die. But that's what you want, isn't it?
That's a lie!
Oh yes? You want him to die. What did you do to him on the Bridge? Did you make him forget to put the visor over his eyes?
You're insane!
Yes, you know your rival, don't you? You couldn't keep him from making a mind-link with Kollos, something you couldn't do yourself! With my words, I'll make you hear such ugliness as Spock saw when he looked at Kollos with his naked eyes! The ugliness is within you!
That's a lie! Liar!
Your desire to see Kollos is madness! You can never see him. Never. But Spock saw Kollos, and for that he must die.
Sadistic, filthy liar!
The smell of hatred, the stench of jealousy permeates you. Why don't you strangle him while he lies there?
Don't say anymore, please!
Kollos knows what's in your heart. You can lie to yourself, but you can't lie to Kollos.
Please go away!
What'd you say to her?
Maybe too much.
What's she doing in there?
You may be right, Bones. Maybe I shouldn't have gone in. She was blind, really blind. Really in the dark. And if he dies. If he dies, how do I know that I didn't kill him? How do I know that she can stand to hear the truth?
Now, Spock, this is to the death. Or to life for both of us.
Spock.
You look like you've paid a visit to the devil himself.
Miranda.
You have what you wanted most.
I am one with Kollos.
Well, I'm truly sorry that you're leaving. Goodbye.
We come to the end of an eventful trip, Captain.
I didn't think you'd even talk to me.
Well, I have you to thank for my future. Your words enabled me to see.
Miranda, good luck, Health. I have something for you.
I suppose it has thorns.
I never met a rose that didn't.
(to Spock) I know now the great joy you felt when you joined minds with Kollos.
I rejoice in your knowledge and in your achievement.
I understand, Mister Spock. The glory of creation is in its infinite diversity.
And the ways our differences combine to create meaning and beauty.
Peace and long life, Spock.
Live long and prosper, Miranda.
Peace.
Spectre Of The Gun
On mark eight and closing.
Steady as she goes. Phaser crew, stand by.
Range, forty five thousand kilometres, Captain.
Fascinating.
Range, forty three thousand kilometres and closing.
Sensor readings?
A mechanical device of unknown properties. I read no life forms aboard.
Analysis, Science Officer?
Obviously, it intends to intercept us. It has made several course changes corresponding with our own.
Thirty eight thousand and closing. Thirty five thousand and closing.
Unclear whether it intends to attack or merely communicate with us.
Thank you, Science Officer. Come to one eight one mark seven.
Aye, aye, sir.
It's staying with us.
Indeed.
Full stop, Mister Chekov. Hold your position.
Aye, sir.
Aliens, you have encroached on the space of the Melkot. You will turn back immediately. This is the only warning you will receive.
Vulcan, Captain.
English.
It was Russian, sir. Every word.
No, Captain. It was Swahili.
Interesting. Telepathy.
Unquestionably. Most impressive.
Our orders are very clear. We're to establish contact with the Melkotians at all costs.
True telepaths can be most formidable, and we have been warned.
What previous contacts have been made with the Melkotians?
No recorded contacts. If they ever ventured into space, they evidently withdrew immediately.
Lieutenant, hailing frequencies.
Tied in, sir.
This is Captain James T. Kirk of the starship Enterprise, representing the United Federation of Planets. We've contacted your buoy and understand its message. We hope that you will understand that our intent is to establish peaceful relations with you. Lieutenant, answer?
Nothing, sir. Clear on all frequencies.
Try again.
Still no response, sir.
Opinion, Mister Spock?
I prefer being a welcomed guest, Captain, but there seems to be little choice.
None whatsoever. Mister Chekov, deflectors at full intensity. Increase speed to achieve planet fall as scheduled.
Aye, sir. Standard orbit in five minutes.
Lieutenant Uhura, advise Doctor McCoy and Engineer Scott to meet me in the transporter room. Mister Spock, Mister Chekov, let's go find out what it is they're afraid of.
Spock, what is this?
Unknown, Captain. Sensor readings give no indication of fog like conditions in this area.
I knew it had to happen. It's a fine time for that transporter mechanism to break down.
Impossible, Doctor McCoy. My transporter was working perfectly.
Then what are we doing here?
Tricorder readings, Mister Spock?
Unknown, Captain. Unlike Mister Scott's transporter, this unit is not functioning.
Then let's get out of here. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
No use, Captain. Obviously none of our devices will function. Apparently that Melkotian buoy
(a pair of red eyes in the fog) Aliens. Our warning was plain. You have disregarded it. You shall be punished. You, Captain Kirk, the disobedience was on your orders. Yours is the responsibility. Yours shall be the pattern of your death.
We come in peace, but we'll defend ourselves if necessary.
You are outside. You are disease. The disease must be destroyed. Your plea has been heard, and sentence has been pronounced. It is done.
Fascinating.
Where are we now, Captain?
Spock, evaluation?
Obviously this represents the Melkotian's concept of an American frontier town, circa 1880.
It's just bits and pieces. It's incomplete.
Perhaps the Melkotians have insufficient data about this era.
Or perhaps this is all they require to complete the pattern of our death.
And these, Captain? (the guns)
Beautiful specimen.
Crude but dangerous.
Whatever the Melkotians have planned for us, it won't be pleasant. These could be useful. Just remember one thing. To individuals at close range, these could be as deadly as phasers.
In the midst of what seems so unreal, the harsh reality. This is not a dream.
(reading from a newspaper pinned up) October 26, 1881. Tombstone, Arizona.
Tombstone. Hell for leather, right out of history.
But why here? And why now?
Captain, the Melkot said you were the pattern. He looked into your mind and selected what he considered the proper time and place for our punishment.
Because my ancestors pioneered the American frontier.
Yes. The violence of your own heritage is to be the pattern for our execution.
What's the matter with us? We're talking like we really are in Tombstone, Arizona in 1881.
Precisely, in terms of what the Melkots intend for us.
There's something about that date, October 26, 1881 But what was it?
Ike! Ike! Frank! Billy! Tom! (shakes Kirk's hand) Ike, I was afraid you weren't going to make it.
Looks like we did.
I knew you wouldn't let them scare you away. They're a bunch of hot air if you ask me.
Are they really?
Now they're going to have to fight after the way they shot off their mouths.
You know us?
Funny. That's what I like about you, lke. You always see the funny side.
I'm a barrel of laughs.
Nobody can say Johnny Behan doesn't have a sense of humour. (walks on)
Johnny? He called me lke, you Frank, Bones Tom, and Billy. Ike Clanton, Tom and Frank McLowery, Billy Claiborne, Billy Clanton.
Captain, I pride myself on my knowledge of your Earth history. The names were known in the annals of the opening of the western sector of America. the United States of America, that is.
In the late nineteenth century in Arizona, two factions fought for control of the town of Tombstone. The Earps, Morgan, Virgil and Wyatt, who were the town marshals, along with Doc Holliday.
And the Clanton gang. On October 26th, they had it out.
Who won?
The Clantons lost, Mister Chekov.
And we are the Clantons?
We are the Clantons. And if this is a replay of history
History cannot be changed.
It's impossible! Things like this can't happen.
Is this a dead man, Doctor?
Very dead, Mister Spock.
That's one thing we can be sure of. Death is real.
Ike, Frank, hiya, boys. I didn't think I'd see you again.
Billy! Oh, Billy! (kisses Chekov) Billy, baby, I knew they couldn't keep you out of town.
Oh, you knew that?
Come on.
Maybe you shouldn't have.
And pass up an opportunity to see you? Don't be silly.
It's taking crazy chances with Morgan Earp right in the same room.
Yes, of course. The man who kills on sight. Morgan Earp.
Captain, since we have seen that death is the one reality in this situation, I seriously suggest you reseat yourself immediately. Without moving a muscle of either hand. If I remember correctly, that would involve you in what was called the fast draw. It initiated unfortunate events.
You boys want your usual?
Absolutely. Half a gallon of scotch.
You know we ain't got nothing but bourbon, unless you want corn whiskey.
I wish it was all over. I saw Virgil out patrolling this morning.
Good old Virgil. We can always count on him.
They've been blowing off all over town about how they chased the Clantons out. I guess you'll show them now, won't you?
I don't think we're going to have any choice.
You'll dirty yourself with this scum. Come on.
Get your hands off her.
Now, Claiborne.
No, no, no. All right, all right, all right. We don't want any trouble.
If you don't want any trouble, what are you doing in my town?
Just leave us alone, Mister Earp. That's all we ask.
Five of you. You'd like me to draw, wouldn't you? All right, I will. Soon enough. Soon enough.
I believe he was actually trying to provoke a dispute with Mister Chekov.
(bringing a bottle and glasses.) Close, Ike. Lucky there wasn't two of them.
I guess so.
Sylvia's right. They've been bad-mouthing something fierce all over town. You boys watch it.
I assure you, sir, we shall watch it, and everything, extremely closely.
Billy, you were wonderful. (she kisses him)
Er, Mister Chekov?
What can I do, Captain? You know we're always supposed to maintain good relations with the natives. (he kisses her)
Young lady. Young lady.
Yes, Ike?
I'd like to talk to Mister, to Billy alone, if you don't mind.
All right. I understand. Billy Claiborne, you be careful.
Mister Chekov, you be careful. Mister Spock, except for our hand guns, we haven't changed, not even our clothing, yet these people see and hear us as the Clantons.
I don't think that's such a bad thing, Captain.
The day is still young, Ensign.
All right, what have we got? We're here in Tombstone, Arizona, October 26, 1881. The day of the gunfight at OK Corral. And we're the Clantons, and Morgan Earp has just gone to tell his brothers we're here.
And if this is indeed some sort of replay of history, the Earps will kill the Clantons at the OK Corral at five o'clock this afternoon.
Well, we're not going to be at the OK Corral at five o'clock this afternoon. You, bartender. Ed. You, er, you claim you know us.
I ain't making no big claims about you to nobody. Just so happens.
Take a close look at me.
Yeah?
Who do you think I am?
Ike Clanton. Who do you think you are?
I know this is hard to understand, but I'm Captain James T. Kirk of the spaceship Enterprise. These men are part of my crew. We're not really here, we're from the future. We haven't been born yet. Feel the material in my shirt. Now feel the material in your own shirt. Do you notice any difference?
No.
Do these clothes look like yours?
Not exactly.
Have you seen clothes like this before?
Sure.
Where?
On the Clantons. You Clantons are always great with your jokes. That's why we like you.
I'm not joking.
The only difference between you and the Earps is that they never joke.
I'm not joking! I'm not Ike Clanton!
It's okay with me, Ike. Anything you say. Don't make no difference who I think you are. Your problem is, who does Wyatt Earp think you are?
Good morning, gentlemen. My name's James Kirk. I'm afraid there's been some sort of misunderstanding.
Clanton, I don't know what you're trying to pull, but we warned you not to show your ugly face in town again.
Yes, of course you did, and I wanted to talk to you about that.
We're done talking, Clanton.
There's been some sort of mistake, a misunderstanding.
All right, Clanton. One more chance. Your last. You've got until five tonight to get your horse-stealing scurvy crew out of town. All the way.
Yes. We'd be glad to. We don't want to fight.
I always said you was yellow, Clanton.
I'll make one more attempt to get through to you, Mister Earp. My name is not Clanton, it's Kirk.
Oh, yeah. We heard the talk about your jokes.
I'm not joking.
Sure. Well, I'm glad to meet you Mister Kirk.
Draw, Clanton.
Not me, Mister Earp.
You draw or I will.
No, Wyatt. Let me. When the time comes, I'll pay him for this.
We don't want any trouble. We'll be glad to co-operate.
Five o'clock, Clanton. Is that clear? If you're in town at five oh one, we'll kill every one of you whether you draw or not. Is that clear?
What's the matter?
What do you call that stuff? Fire?
Taos Lightning straight bourbon. Try some. In small amounts, it was considered medicinal.
Label it for external use Only.
It just takes a bit of getting used to, Captain. Actually, a man could grow quite fond of this stuff.
Take it easy, Mister Scott. I hate to think what that stuff's doing to your stomach lining.
And your reflexes. We're going to need fast reflexes from now on. There's no negotiating with the Earps. We know that.
Aye. If we only had a phaser.
Or a communicator. It'd be a pleasure to watch those Earps as we beamed back to the ship at exactly four fifty nine thirty.
Could we make a communicator?
Impossible, Captain. In this century, there are no metal alloys or power sources to make devices such as ours.
The problem is clear, Spock. We're going to have to seek contemporary solutions. Where's Chekov?
Mister Chekov is involved, Captain.
You shouldn't have come back to town, Billy. Morgan'll kill you because he wants me.
With his outdated weapon? If he shoots at me, I will just step out of the way.
You can joke about it. I've seen them in action. Especially Morgan.
A lot of people and things have tried to kill me. You'd be surprised.
Mister Chekov, I mean Billy. Come along.
Yes, sir.
Billy? Please, don't even go near him.
Gentlemen.
Where are we going, Captain?
To exercise the better part of valour.
Well, that settles that. A force field.
It is obvious the Melkotians are not going to permit us to leave this town.
If we could only contact the Enterprise.
Yes, but where is the Enterprise?
Mister Chekov. If you were in charge of the Enterprise, what would you be doing?
I'd be using the ship's sensors trying to locate us.
Very good. If we could find the place where we beamed down, the ship might lock in and beam us up.
Well let's get there.
There's no way we can know where it is, Doctor.
It could be anywhere within a thousand mile radius.
Mister Spock, why don't you join us common humanoids in trying to find a way out of here, and quit explaining why we can't get out of here.
We have until five o'clock to find that way. Now consider this. What materials were on hand in 1881 that could help us fight the Earps on their own terms?
(showing his gun) We have these, Captain.
No, the Melkots gave us those to execute us. We have to find a way to put the Earps out of action. Is there anything that exists here and now that could help us out of this trap?
All those western Cossacks had were poisonous snakes and cactus plants.
Bones, the venom, the plants. Can you make use of them?
A tranquilliser. Of course, Jim. I can make a tranquilliser!
I could make a device to deliver it on target.
First, Bones, the ingredients you require.
I know the place to get the proper drugs. I'll need a mortar and a pestle.
Chekov, mortar and pestle.
How do you intend to deliver the tranquilliser on target?
I shall need some fusing and cotton wadding.
Cotton wadding. Try the apothecary.
Aye. (leaves)
I shall manufacture the equivalent of an ancient generating canister, more familiarly known as a gas grenade.
I'll be about five minutes yet. You could come back.
Well, thank you. Mind if I look around a bit? (checking the bottles) Crude, but very useable.
I wouldn't touch that stuff if I was you.
Oh, you don't have to worry. I know how to handle this. I have an urgent need for a small supply of this drug, too.
That stuff ain't mine. It belongs to him. You'd better ask him.
Oh, so you're the dentist. Well, I'm a physician, and I have a serious emergency. I wonder if you mind if I borrow a small quantity of this.
You want it now?
My name is McCoy. I'm a doctor.
That joke is all around town already, McLowery. But my name is still Holliday. Doc Holliday.
The emergency is real. I need these things.
Your emergency sure is real. Go on, take the stuff. Have some more fun. Take my bag. Only best you be finished before five o'clock.
That is my intention, Doctor.
Because at one minute past five, you'll find a hole in your head. Right from this gun.
Ahem. 
Sylvia! Hello.
Billy Claiborne, you know how crazy I am about you.
That's very nice.
Well, aren't you going to ask me what I've got in my shopping bag?
That's just what I was preparing to inquire. Have you been shopping?
Of course, silly! What else would I be doing on a beautiful afternoon with the dance only one week away? Or have you forgotten that already?
No, no, I haven't forgotten. I am looking forward to it most eagerly.
You will be absolutely wild when you see me in the new gown I'm going to make. I found this most scrumptious material, yards and yards of it. You know what I was thinking, Billy? I was thinking what a beautiful wedding gown it would make. Why don't we just turn that dance into a wedding ball? It would be so heavenly.
Married? I'm afraid that wouldn't be possible.
But I'm positive the gown will be ready. What else is there to stop a wedding?
But it is absolutely impossible. I am not someone you can marry. If only I could make clear to you what I really am.
Do you think I don't know? Billy Claiborne, you are a cattle rustler and a horse thief and I don't care what else.
I warned you, Claiborne. Stay away.
You don't have to take anything from that scum, not while I'm here.
Mister Earp. Get your hands off her.
There's nothing I can do, Jim.
Come on, Clanton. Let's do it now.
Captain, let me.
No.
Yeah, come on, Captain. Let him.
Captain, we can't just stand here and take it.
Yes, we can.
But they murdered Chekov! If you think I'm going to
Scotty, they're trying to push us into something we're not ready for.
And it is not yet our time.
Let it go, Jim. He's dead.
Maybe he wouldn't be if I hadn't ignored the Melkot warning.
We all knew the risk when we joined the service. Now let it go.
Gentlemen, there is one thing which requires the immediate attention of all of us. Specifically, our future.
But not this minute, Spock. It takes us a little longer.
I understand the feeling, Captain.
You talk about another man's feelings. What do you feel, Spock?
My feelings are not a subject for discussion, Doctor.
Because there are no feelings to discuss.
Mister Spock, Chekov is dead! I say it now, and I can hardly believe it. But you worked closely with him. That deserves some memorial.
Spock will have no truck with grief, Scotty. It's human.
Bones, Scotty.
Captain, it's quite all right. They forget I am half human.
We don't have much time.
Captain. I vaguely remember the historical account of the famous battle in which we are about to engage, but I am confused.
About what?
Since each of us represents members of the Clanton gang. You, Ike Clanton, I, Frank McLowery, then Mister Chekov would be the other Billy, would he not?
William Claiborne, that's right.
But did not William Claiborne survive the battle at the OK Corral?
Get to the point, Spock.
Mister Chekov is dead. But in the actual gunfight, William Claiborne survived.
Yes. Yes, that's right. That means it doesn't have to happen the way it happened. We can change it. Bones, how's the tranquilliser coming?
I'll have it ready before Spock.
Spock?
Another hour.
And we'll have a tranquilliser grenade?
Not precisely.
Forget precision. Will it work?
It should.
Make sure it does, Spock. If we don't tranquillise them, we'll have to fight them.
And if we fight them, we all die. We know that.
Negotiating with them could buy us more time, Captain.
But not with the Earps. I've tried that. That's out. There must be a way. History has been changed in the fact that Billy Claiborne didn't die, but Chekov is lying there dead. That means there must be a way to change this history.
It would be worth a try, at least until we're certain of the device. Then perhaps we could quiet things down.
Not with the Earps. There is one other place I can try.
You looking for somebody?
Yes, Sheriff. I want you to stop the fight.
Stop it? Who wants to stop it? I sure don't. You don't. You didn't yesterday.
I do now.
Since when does a Clanton run crawling to the law for help?
How else is he going to get justice?
(indicating gun) From this. You and your boys set up this whole thing to take care of the Earps. It's a little late to decide you don't have the belly for it.
It's not too late. Sheriff. Sheriff. There must be plenty of decent people in town who don't like the Earps. Let's organise them.
Don't talk nonsense. The people in this town are counting on you to get rid of the Earps for them.
Then the people had better wake up and let the law work for them.
You can talk that way after what the Earps did to Billy today? Nobody in this town will deny you your right to your revenge.
Yes, I want revenge. I want to crush the life out of the Earps. But I can't just kill them.
You listen to me. Get down to the OK Corral. Keep out of sight. When the Earps come looking, you bushwhack them.
Can't I get it through your stupid head? I can't just kill them! I can't murder them!
It's the only way.
I can't kill them! I can't kill them!
Kill them any way you can! There'll be no questions asked. Honest. I guarantee that!
These crude supplies we were forced to use worked quite well.
I doubt that this combination of things was ever used for any purpose quite like this.
Perhaps they would've been if they'd had your ingenuity, Doctor.
Captain?
How soon will that be ready?
Right now.
Good. How long will it take the tranquilliser to have effect?
Three or four seconds.
How did you manage to test it?
It has not been tested.
It's not necessary, Captain. It's very simple. Nothing can go wrong.
Up to now, everything has gone wrong. I want it tested now.
Would a volunteer solve the problem?
It would.
All right. On one condition. That I'm wide awake and with you at five o'clock.
Guaranteed.
Aye. (has a slug of whiskey) It's to kill the pain.
But this is painless.
Well, you should've warned me sooner, Mister Spock. Fire away.
It should have worked. Did you inhale the gas, Scotty?
Aye. Deeply.
You still feel all right?
I never felt better.
No dizziness? No sweating? No palpitations?
It doesn't work.
Fascinating.
It was our last chance.
Captain, you don't seem to understand. It did not function, but it must function.
Nothing could go wrong, Captain. It should work.
A scientific fact But if the tranquilliser does not function, which is clearly impossible, then a radical alteration of our thought patterns must be in order.
We need a weapon. An answer.
You don't have to worry about that now, Jim. Look at the clock.
Ten minutes and it's all going to end at the OK Corral. Well, we're going to wait right here until well after five o'clock. We're not going to move from this spot.
Let's get out of here.
Scotty, Bones. (and it's all the way around.) We're trapped. They got their way. We've got to stand and fight.
Good. If they want a fight, let's gie'em a fight.
They're experts at gunfighting. We don't have a chance.
Then we'd better become experts, and fast.
That may not be necessary.
Spock, you've got something?
A fact, Captain. Physical laws simply cannot be ignored. Existence cannot be without them.
What do you mean, Spock?
I mean, Doctor, that we are faced with a staggering contradiction. The tranquilliser you created should have been effective.
It would've been effective anywhere else.
Exactly. Doctor, in your opinion, what killed Mister Chekov?
A piece of lead in his body.
Wrong. His mind killed him.
Come on, Spock. If you've got the answer, tell us.
Physical reality is consistent with universal laws. Where the laws do not operate, there is no reality. All of this is unreal.
What do you mean unreal? I examined Chekov. He's dead.
But you made your examination under conditions which we cannot trust. We judge reality by the response of our senses. Once we are convinced of the reality of a given situation, we abide by its rules. We judged the bullets to be solid, the guns to be real, therefore they can kill.
Chekov is dead because he believed the bullets would kill him.
He may indeed be dead. We do not know.
But we do know that the Melkotians created the situation. If we do not allow ourselves to believe that the bullets are real, they cannot kill us.
Exactly. I know the bullets are unreal, therefore they cannot harm me.
We must all be as certain as you are, Mister Spock, to save our lives.
Precisely.
But that's not possible. There'd always be some doubt.
The smallest doubt would be enough to kill you.
We're just human beings, Spock. We don't have that clockwork ticker in our head like you do. We can't turn it on and off.
We must. Spock, a Vulcan mind meld.
Very well, sir. Engineer?
Your mind to my mind. Your thoughts to my thoughts.
(to McCoy) The bullets are unreal. Without body. They are illusions only. Shadows without substance. They will not pass through your body, for they do not exist.
They do not exist.
Captain.
Draw.
Captain, I don't understand.
Neither do I. He's in perfect health.
What happened? Where have I been?
Right here, it seems.
But that girl. She was so beautiful. So real.
Do you remember anything else?
No.
Good. Perhaps that explains why he's here. Nothing was real to him except the girl.
Captain, the Melkotian object.
Sensor readings.
The object is beginning to emit M-rays of a highly unstable nature, Captain.
Lieutenant, sound Red Alert. Mister Chekov, deflector shields on full. Phaser gun crews, lock on target.
Energy output increasing beyond measurable levels, Captain.
Phaser guns, stand by to fire.
It's, it's gone, sir.
Damage report, Lieutenant.
No damage, sir. All decks report fully operational.
Captain Kirk. You did not kill. Is this the way of your kind?
It is. We fight only when there's no choice. We prefer the ways of peaceful contact. I speak for a vast alliance of fellow creatures who believe in the same thing. We have sought you out to join us. Our mission is still one of peace.
Approach our planet and be welcome. A delegation will come out to meet you. Our warning threats are over.
Excellent. Lieutenant, cancel Red Alert. Mister Chekov, resume original course, warp factor two.
Warp factor two, sir.
Captain. May I ask a question? You needn't answer if it seems too personal.
I'm sure I'll be able to give you an answer, Mister Spock.
This afternoon, you wanted to kill, didn't you?
But he didn't kill, Mister Spock.
But he wanted to, Doctor.
Is that the way it seemed to you, Mister Spock?
Yes, Captain.
Mister Spock, you're absolutely right. That's exactly the way it was.
Mankind, ready to kill.
That's the way it was in 1881.
I wonder how humanity managed to survive.
We overcame our instinct for violence.
The Day Of The Dove
Report, Mister Chekov.
Full scan. Results negative. Radiation level normal. Atmosphere and terrain are undisturbed. No evidence of a colony nor any residual aftereffect of a force that might have annihilated it.
Life readings, Doctor McCoy?
Nothing. They said they were being attacked by an unidentified ship.
Which we were unable to detect upon approach.
An entire human colony, a whole settlement. One hundred men, women and children. Who did it? And why? (communicator beep) Kirk here.
Spock here, Captain.
Sensors have picked up a Klingon ship, closing fast.
Deflectors on. Condition Red. Protect yourselves.
Total reply if attacked. So that's the answer. Klingons.
Trouble aboard the Klingon ship. Evidence of explosions, massive destruction.
Captain, the enemy ship is drifting, totally disabled.
And we never fired upon her.
Maintain Red Alert.
You attacked my ship! Four hundred of my crew dead. Kirk, my ship is disabled. I claim yours. You are now prisoners of the Klingon Empire against which you have committed a wanton act of war!
For three years, the Federation and the Klingon Empire have been at peace. A treaty we have honoured to the letter.
We took no action against your ship, Kang.
Were the screams of my crew imaginary? What were your orders, Kirk? To start a war? You've succeeded. To test a new weapon? We shall be happy to examine it.
There was a Federation colony on this planet. It was destroyed.
By what? No bodies, no ruins. A colony of the invisible?
Yes, a test of a new Klingon weapon, leaving no traces. Federation ships don't specialise in sneak attacks.
We have wondered when you would begin. You lured my ship into ambush by a false Klingon distress call. You will tell us why with the proper persuasion.
You received a distress call? We received a distress call.
I don't propose to spend the rest of my life on this ball of dust arguing your fantasies. The Enterprise is mine! Instruct your transporter room to beam us aboard.
Go to the devil.
We have no devil, Kirk. But we understand the habits of yours. I shall torture you to death one by one until your noble captain cries enough. Who will be first?
Cossacks! Filthy Klingon murderers! You killed my brother Piotre. The Archanis Four research outpost. A hundred peaceful people massacred! Just like you did here. My brother, you killed my brother.
And you volunteer to join him. That is loyalty.
Chekov! Stop the torture!
Jim, you can't hand over the Enterprise.
Help Chekov.
Don't plan any tricks, Kirk. I will kill one hundred hostages at the first sign of treachery.
I'll beam you aboard the Enterprise. Once there, no tricks.
Captain, you can't. Don't let these animals have the ship.
Move aside. (he tends to Chekov)
Animals? Your captain crawls like one. A Klingon would never have surrendered. Order everybody in this area to be transported up. All weapons on him.
Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Spock.
Here, Captain.
Mister Spock, we have guests. Adjust transporter to wide field. Beam up everyone in the target area. (and presses a button)
Understood, Captain. Transporter room.
Full security, Johnson, on the double.
Good work, Spock.
What happened?
Our landing party is intact, Doctor.
All others suspended in transit. Who are the guests, by the way?
Klingons.
Well, they're right in here.
Johnson?
Security on the way, sir.
Captain, leave them where they are. Non-existence. That's so many less Klingon monsters in the galaxy.
Bring them in.
Move 'em out. Move!
Liar!
I said no tricks after we reach the ship. You're a prisoner of the Federation of Planets against which you may or may not have committed an act of war.
There are still survivors aboard my ship.
Captain, we've not been able to get through to Starfleet Command. All subspace frequencies have been blocked, and there's too much radiation coming from that Klingon ship. It's a hazard to the vicinity.
Prepare to destruct.
Completing the job you started?
You wouldn't be standing here if I had.
First group from the Klingon vessel, Captain.
My wife, Mara, and my science officer.
Kang, what has happened?
More Federation treachery. We are prisoners.
What will they do to us? I've heard of their atrocities, their death camps. They will torture us for our scientific and military information.
Apparently you have a few things to learn about us. Detain them in the crew lounge. Programme the food synthesiser to accommodate our guests. You'll be well-treated, Kang.
So I have seen.
Secure from Red Alert.
But maintain general quarters. Scan this sector for other ships. Run a full check on the colony. I want this thing nailed down fast.
We know what happened. That distress call.
At the moment we received the distress signal from the colony on Beta Twelve A, the Klingons were too far distant to have been the attackers. Moreover, they also were apparently attracted by a distress call.
Lies. They want to start a war by pretending that we did.
Chekov may be right. The Klingons claim to have honoured the truce, but there have been incidents, raids on our outposts.
No proof that Klingons committed it.
What proof do we need? We know what a Klingon is.
Our log tapes will indicate our innocence in the present situation.
Unfortunately, there's no guarantee that they will be believed.
Report.
Still no contact with Starfleet Command, sir. Outside communications blanketed.
Keep trying. We've got a diplomatic tiger by the tail.
Transporter room to Bridge. Klingon ship is vacated, sir.
Very good, Scotty. Mister Sulu?
Forward phasers locked and ready to fire, sir.
Fire phasers.
Sensor sweeps reveal no other ships within range, Captain.
Lieutenant Uhura?
No contact with Starfleet as yet, sir.
Mister Sulu, change course to seventeen mark four, warp factor three.
Warp factor three, sir.
When I take this ship, I'll have Kirk's head stuffed and hung on his cabin wall.
They will kill us before we can act.
No, they wish to question us, learn our strength, our plans. They never will.
We are forty against four hundred.
Four thousand throats may be cut in one night by a running man.
Patience. Vigilance. They will make a mistake. Capture of the Enterprise will give us knowledge to end this war quickly.
(losing her temper) Captain! This doesn't make sense. Carriers are normal. Channels are open. There's still no outside contact! I don't understand it, sir. Could the Klingons be doing something?
Sulu?
Change in course. Accelerating. Helm dead. Auxiliary navigation dead.
Override.
Nothing responds, Captain.
Scotty, stop all engines.
I would if I could, sir.
The controls have gone crazy. Something's taken over.
Scotty!
The engines, sir.
They've gone to warp nine, by themselves!
New course?
Nine oh two mark five.
That'll take us out of the galaxy.
Captain, reports coming in from the lower decks. Emergency bulkheads have closed. Almost four hundred crewmen are trapped down there, sir.
Most interesting. The bulk of your crew trapped, your ship racing from this galaxy at wild speeds. Delightful. How did I perform this sabotage, Kirk? All my men are here.
Johnson. Get down to Security. Search every section. Some Klingons may have beamed aboard undetected from the wrecked ship. Then get down to Engineering and help Scotty hammer things back to normal. And free those trapped crewmen. (to Kang) And before I put you in the brig, there's a little something I owe you.
Phasers.
Out!
Sickbay.
Bridge.
The Klingons are free. They're armed as we are. They'll try to take the ship. Scotty, how many men do we have?
Three hundred and ninety two trapped below decks.
Deploy forces to protect your section and the auxiliary control centre.
Check the armoury, and try and free those trapped crewmen.
The doors and bulkheads won't budge. We'll have to cut through.
Blow out the bulkheads if you have to. We need numbers. What kind of luck have you had controlling the ship's speed?
No, sir. She's a projectile at warp nine. And don't ask me what's holding her together.
Five-minute report. Kirk out.
Full sensor scan of the ship. Report on any movement by the Klingons. The Klingon Empire has maintained a duelling tradition. They think they can beat us with swords.
Captain, neither the Klingon technology nor ours, is capable of this. The instantaneous transmutation of matter. I doubt that they are responsible.
Any other logical candidate?
None. However, if they had such power, would they not have used it to create more effective weapons and only for themselves?
Mister Sulu. Get below. Take command of Engineering and auxiliary control.
Aye, sir.
Captain. (he has a sword too)
Mister Chekov.
Captain! (gets up to go with Sulu)
Mister Chekov, as you were. Chekov!
Sir, let me go too. I've got a personal score to settle with the Klingons.
This is no time for a vendetta. Maintain your post.
Captain!
Chekov, maintain your post!
Don't try to stop me, Captain. I saw what they left of Piotre, and I swore on his grave I would avenge his murder.
What's Chekov's grudge against the Klingons? Who's Piotre?
His only brother, killed in a Klingon raid.
His brother? He never had a brother. He's an only child.
Sulu, get down to Engineering.
Aye, sir.
Security, this is the captain. Find Mister Chekov and bring him to the bridge.
Captain, why would, why would Chekov believe he has a brother?
I don't know, but he does. And now he wants revenge for a non-existent loss.
There. Those filthy butchers. There are rules, even in war. You don't keep hacking at a man after he's down. Hand me that numanol capsule.
Layout and specifications of the Enterprise, Commander.
Enemy numbers are the same as ours. We have a fighting balance.
Then we take the ship.
A ship that is headed towards the end of the galaxy?
In time, in time. We must take these sections. First, Engineering.
Kirk here.
Scott here, sir. There's no use trying to free those men down below. The phaser torches, they won't cut through the bulkheads, nor the doors, nor the decks. There's something happened to the metal.
What about the armoury?
I'm there now, sir, and you never saw such a fine collection of antiques in your life.
Get back to Engineering. Try to re-establish engine control, and talk to ordnance about manufacturing phaser replacements.
Aye, sir. (spots a special sword amongst the ordinary ones.) A Claymore. You're a beauty.
What the blazes is going on?
Scans indicate that our forces and those of the Klingons are exactly equal at thirty eight each. The Klingons control deck six and starboard deck seven, while we control all sections above.
Constant surveillance, Mister Spock.
Most curious, Captain. There appear to be more life-energy units on board than can be accounted for by the presence of the Enterprise crew plus the Klingons. A considerable discrepancy.
Could more Klingons have beamed aboard?
I shall attempt a compensatory reading of Klingon units.
Any signs of those devils, Mister Sulu?
All clear, Mister Scott.
They've taken Engineering. I don't know how many more of those Klingons are around, but we'll split up here and try to make it back to the bridge.
Aye.
Victory! Victory!
No additional Klingons detected, Captain. It is an alien life force, a single entity. I cannot ascertain its location.
An alien life force. We must make contact, find out what it wants.
Readings being diverted to the library computer for analysis. Computer report.
Alien life force onboard is composed of pure energy. Type unknown. Actions indicate intelligence and purpose.
What purpose?
Insufficient data for further analysis.
A brother that never existed, a phantom colony, imaginary distress calls, the creation of these weapons. Do you sense a pattern, Mister Spock?
If the alien is creating these events, Captain, it is apparently capable of manipulating matter and mind.
And now it has control of the Enterprise and taking us out of the galaxy. But why?
Captain, I am constrained to point out that since minds are evidently being influenced, we cannot know at this moment whether our own memories are completely accurate and true.
We must talk to Kang, bury the hatchet.
An appropriate choice of terms. However, it is notoriously difficult to arrange a truce with the Klingons once blood has been drawn.
Truce? Are you serious? I've got men in Sickbay, some of them dying. Atrocities committed on their persons, and you talk about making peace with these fiends? If our backs were turned, they'd jump us in a minute. And you know what Klingons do to prisoners. Slave labour, death planets, experiments!
McCoy?
While you're talking, they're planning attacks. This is a fight to the death. We'd better start trying to win it!
We are attempting to end it, Doctor. By reason, preferably. There is an alien on board which may have created this situation.
Who cares what started it, Mister Spock. We're in it! Murderers. We should wipe out every one of them!
The alien is the real threat. That's the enemy we have to wipe out.
Sickbay calling, Doctor. There are more wounded men requiring your attention.
How many more men must die before you two begin to act like military men instead of fools? (leaves)
Kirk here.
This is Kang.
Kang, there's something important I must discuss with you.
I have captured your engineering section. I now control this ship's power and life-support systems.
I have deprived all areas except our own. You will die of suffocation in the icy cold of space.
(dictating into PADD) The Enterprise is heading out of our galaxy, controlled by a mysterious alien somewhere aboard the ship. Engineering has been taken over by Klingons who have cut off life-support systems. Mister Sulu.
Captain.
Get down to emergency manual control. Try to protect our life-support circuits and auxiliary power.
Aye, Captain.
Sir. Chekov was right, Captain.
Scotty, I'm glad you've come.
We should have left those fuzz-faced goons in the transporter. That's right where they belong!
Scotty?
Non-existence! Now they can study the Enterprise, add our technology to theirs, change the balance of power. You've jeopardised the Federation!
Scotty, take it easy.
Easy, Mister Scott.
Keep your Vulcan hands off me. Just keep away! Your feelings might be hurt, you green-blooded half-breed!
May I say that I have not thoroughly enjoyed serving with humans? I find their illogic and foolish emotions a constant irritant.
Then transfer out, freak!
Gentlemen! (intervenes as they nearly come to blows.) Spock! Scotty. Spock. Spock! Stop it! You're half human! What are we saying? What are we doing to each other?
Fascinating. The result of stress?
We've been under stress before. It's never set us at each other's throats.
But this is war.
There isn't any war! Or is there?
Have we forgotten how to defend ourselves?
Scotty. What's happening to us? We've been trained to think in other terms than war. We've been trained to fight its causes, if necessary. Then why are we behaving like a group of savages? Look at me. Look at me. Two forces aboard this ship, each of them equally armed. Has a war been staged for us, complete with weapons and ideology and patriotic drum beating? Even, Spock, even race hatred?
Recent events would seem to be directed toward a magnification of the basic hostilities between humans and Klingons. Apparently, it is by design that we fight. We seem to be pawns.
But what's the game? And whose? And what are the rules?
It is most urgent that we locate the alien entity immediately, and determine its motives and a method for halting its activities.
Without sensors? All our power down? This thing could go anywhere.
Yes. Mister Sulu, report.
No good, Captain.
Circuits are in, but systems just aren't responding.
We're getting something.
Aye, Captain. Power and life-support restored. Remotes on standby.
Good work.
But, Captain, I didn't do it. Everything just came on by itself.
Their life-support systems have resumed.
Sensors may be operating.
Start scanning. Let's find that alien.
Holding steady.
Cause them to be unsteady.
They appear to be controlled from another location. Also unable to affect ship's course for return to our empire.
One of Kirk's tricks. Could he bypass this circuit? What power is it that supports our battle yet starves our victory? Power. Interrupt it at their main life-support couplings. Where?
Number six deck. (to Klingon) Come.
Alien detected in the engineering section, near reactor number three.
Let's go.
You don't die yet. You're not human, but you're very beautiful. Very beautiful.
Chekov!
Jim, he's not responsible.
What have I done? (to Mara) There's an alien entity aboard the ship. It's forcing us to fight. We don't want to. We don't know what its motive is. We're trying to find out. You must help us. Take me to Kang. A temporary truce, that's all I ask. Spock, take her.
Chekov. Chekov. (picks him up) Is this what's in store for us, from here on in? Violence, hatred.
Brain waves show almost paranoid mania. What happened?
He lost control. So did I. We're becoming animal warriors. Let's go, Spock.
Orderly. Jim. Johnson's heart wound is almost healed. Same with the other casualties. Sword wounds in the vital organs, massive trauma, shock. They're all healing at a fantastic rate.
It would appear that the entity wants us alive.
Why? So we can fight, and fight, and keep coming back for more like some bloody coliseum? What's next, the roar of crowds?
Perhaps human and Klingon psychologies and combat capabilities are being tested by an alien with designs on both powers.
Gentlemen, if we are pawns, you're looking at one who is extremely sorry.
I understand, Doctor. I, too, felt a brief surge of racial bigotry. Most distasteful.
Let's find the alien. (to Mara) You come with us. Maybe we can prove to you that it exists.
What is it?
Totally unfamiliar.
What do you want? What are you doing here?
Reporting for duty, sir.
Duty? Did McCoy release you from Sickbay?
I released myself.
Then get back to Sickbay!
Not on your life, sir. I'm fit and ready for action. The Klingons almost did me in once. I'm out to even the score.
I order you
I've got my orders. I'm obeying orders! Kill the Klingons! It's them or us, isn't it?
Johnson!
Fascinating. During Lieutenant Johnson's emotional outburst, his expression of hatred and lust for vengeance, the alien's life energy level increased. When the Lieutenant became unconscious, the alien lost energy.
It subsists on the emotions of others.
This one appears to be strengthened by mental irradiations of hostility, violent intentions.
It exists on the hate of others.
To put it simply. And it has acted as a catalyst, creating this situation in order to satisfy that need. It has brought together opposing forces, provided crude instruments in an effort to promote the most violent mode of conflict.
And kept numbers and resources balanced, so that it can maintain a constant state of violence. It's got to have a vulnerable area. We've got to get rid of it.
Then all hostile attitudes on board must be eliminated. The fighting must end and soon.
Or we're a doomed ship, travelling forever between galaxies, filled with eternal bloodlust, eternal warfare. Kang has got to listen. We've got to pool our knowledge and get rid of this thing. (goes to intercom) Kang. Kang, this is Captain Kirk.
Kang, do you read me?
Commander, it's a trick!
Kang. (switches off intercom) He won't answer.
The alien is affecting his mind, Captain. Soon, it will become so powerful that none of us will be able to resist it.
Scotty, sir.
The ship's dilithium crystals are deteriorating. We can't stop the process.
Time factor?
In twelve minutes, we'll be totally without engine power.
Well, do whatever you can. Kirk out.
And so we drift in space, with only hatred and bloodshed aboard. Now do you believe?
There's no change, Captain. The dilithium crystals are discharging.
There's nothing we can do about it.
If I could talk to Kang, somehow cut through the Klingon lines, make peace before it's too late.
We have nine minutes, fifty three seconds to power zero.
There is, of course, a logical alternative. Kang's wife is, after all, our prisoner. Perhaps a threat.
Aye. Now that's something the Klingons would understand.
Kang! Kang, this is Captain Kirk.
I know you can hear me, so don't cut me off. We have Mara, your wife. We talk truce now, or she dies. Reply.
She has five seconds to live. Reply.
She is a victim of war, Captain.
She understands.
He called my bluff.
You're not going
The Federation doesn't kill or mistreat its prisoners. You've been listening to propaganda, fables. How much time?
Eight minutes, forty two seconds.
So this was no trick?
It's the alien that's done this. We're in its power, our people and yours.
We only wanted to stop the fighting to save us all.
We have always fought. We must. We are hunters, Captain, tracking and taking what we need. There are poor planets in the Klingon systems, we must push outward if we are to survive.
There's another way to survive. Mutual trust and help.
I will help you now.
How?
I will take you to Kang. I will add my voice to yours.
I wouldn't trust her, Captain.
We can't get through the Klingon defences in time, unless. Spock. Intra-ship beaming from one section to another. It's possible?
It has rarely been done because of the danger involved. Pinpoint accuracy is required. If the transportee should materialise inside a solid object, a deck or wall.
Even if it could work, she may be leading you into a trap.
We're all in a trap. This is the only way out.
We'll go with you.
No. That'd start the final battle. I believe her. Prepare the transporter. We'll wait for your signal.
But she can't guarantee that Kang will stop to listen, right, Mister Spock?
No one can guarantee the actions of another.
Your automatic setting is laid in, Captain.
When transporter is energised, you will have eight seconds to get to the pads.
I hope your computations are correct, Mister Spock.
You'll know in seven point nine seconds, Captain.
Mara, you're alive, and you bring us a prize.
Kang, wait. He's come alone, unarmed. He must talk to you.
Brave captain, what about?
No! Listen to him. We are all in danger.
Mara. Before you start killing, give me one minute.
Kang, don't!
What have they done to you, Mara? Are you out of your mind? What have they done to you? (sees the torn tunic) I see why the human beast did not kill you.
They didn't harm me. Listen to him.
With your death, we win.
Nobody wins. Have any more of your men died? We can't be killed. There's an alien aboard. It wants us alive.
No doubt you will reassemble after I have hacked you to bits!
You fool.
Look! Look, Kang. For the rest of our lives. A thousand lifetimes. Senseless violence, fighting, while an alien has total control over us.
All right. All right. In the heart. In the head. I won't stay dead. Next time I'll do the same to you. I'll kill you. And it goes on, the good old game of war, pawn against pawn! Stopping the bad guys. While somewhere, something sits back and laughs and starts it all over again.
Let's jump him.
Those who hate and fight must stop themselves, Doctor. Otherwise, it is not stopped.
Kang, I am your wife. I'm a Klingon. Would I lie for them? Listen to Kirk. He is telling the truth.
Be a pawn, be a toy, be a good soldier that never questions orders.
Klingons kill for their own purposes.
All fighting must end, Captain, to weaken the alien before our dilithium crystals are gone.
Lieutenant Uhura.
Yes, Captain?
Put me on ship-wide intercom.
Aye, sir.
Kang.
Ready, Captain.
This is Captain Kirk. A truce is ordered. The fighting is over. Lay down your weapons.
This is Kang. Cease hostilities. Disarm.
The cessation of violence appears to have weakened it, Captain. I suggest that good spirits might make an effective weapon.
Get off my ship. You're a dead duck here. You're powerless. We know about you, and we don't want to play. Maybe there are others like you around. Maybe you've caused a lot of suffering, a lot of history, but that's all over. We'll be on guard now, ready for you. So ship out! Come on! Haul it!
Yeah, out already.
Out! We need no urging to hate humans. But for the present, only a fool fights in a burning house. Out!
For The World Is Hollow And I Have Touched The Sky
Do we have maximum magnification, Lieutenant?
Yes, sir.
Missile spread, Mister Spock.
Very archaic type, Captain. Sub light speed.
Aye, and chemically fuelled to boot, sir.
Anything on communications, Lieutenant Uhura?
No, sir. All bands clear.
Course of the missile, Mister Spock?
It would appear that the Enterprise is the target, Captain.
Prepare phaser banks one and two, Mister Sulu.
Aye, sir.
Mister Chekov, get a fix on the missile's point of origin.
Aye, Captain.
Phasers one and two locked in and ready.
Fire phasers. (the missiles are obliterated) Mister Chekov, alter course to the missile's point of origin.
Aye, sir.
Warp factor three, Mister Sulu.
Warp factor three, sir.
I am a nurse first, Doctor McCoy, and a member of the crew of the Enterprise second.
You're excused. You may return to your quarters.
No, I'm sorry, Doctor. I've called the Captain and I'll wait until he comes.
What's the emergency?
I said you were excused, Nurse. Please, Christine. I promise you I'll give the Captain a full report.
That was quite a scene.
I've just completed the standard physical examinations for the entire crew.
Excellent. What's the emergency?
The crew is fit. I found nothing unusual, with one exception.
Serious?
Terminal.
What is it?
Xenopolycythemia. It has no cure.
Who?
He has one year to live.
Who is it?
The ship's Chief Medical Officer.
You.
I'll be most effective on the job in the time left, if you'll keep this to yourself.
Mister Spock.
Yes, Captain?
Confirm Chekov's co-ordinates for the missile's point of origin.
Correct, Captain. We are approaching those co-ordinates.
That object on the screen?
An asteroid, two hundred miles in diameter.
Could the enemy vessel be hiding behind the asteroid?
Negative, Captain. We've had that area on scanners constantly.
Then the asteroid is the missile's point of origin.
Correct, Captain.
Full sensor probe, Mister Spock.
Typical asteroid chemically, but it is not orbiting. It is pursing an independent course through this solar system.
How could that be? Unless it's powered. A spaceship?
It is under power, Captain. And correcting for all gravitational stresses.
Source of power?
Atomic. Very archaic. Leaving a trail of debris and hard radiation.
Mister Chekov, plot the course of the asteroid vessel.
Aye, sir.
Asteroid has an outer shell, which is hollow. It surrounds an independent inner core, which has a breathable atmosphere. Sensors read no life forms.
Then it must be on automatic controls.
Then the passengers, or builders, are dead.
Course of asteroid, I mean spaceship two four one mark one seven.
Interesting.
Yes?
The course Ensign Chekov just gave for the asteroid would put it on a collision course with Daran Five.
Daran Five? Inhabited?
Correct. Population approximately three billion and seven hundred twenty four million, if memory serves me correctly. Estimated time of impact three hundred ninety six days.
Mister Sulu, match Enterprise speed with that of the asteroid vessel. Mister Spock and I are transporting aboard. Mister Scott, you have the conn.
Aye, sir.
A lot can happen in a year. Please, give yourself every minute.
Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock and I will handle this.
Without me, Jim? You'd never find your way back.
Well, I think it would be wiser if
I'd like to go. I'm fine, Captain.
All right, Doctor. If that's what you want.
You'd swear you were on the surface of a planet.
One fails to see the logic in making a ship look like a planet.
Wouldn't know this was a spaceship. Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise. Scott here.
Transported without incident. Kirk out.
No apparent opening.
You found no intelligent life forms, Mister Spock, but surely
The asteroid ship is over ten thousand years old, Doctor. Still no sign of life forms, Captain.
These are weapons?
Of a sort. Weapons, communication devices. Let me go to my friend.
You all right?
I think so.
I am Natira, the high priestess of the people. Welcome to the world of Yonada.
I can't say I think much of your welcome.
Take them.
You will kneel.
She called this the world. These people don't know they're on a spaceship.
They've been in flight ten thousand years. Maybe they don't realise it.
Oh, Oracle of the people, most perfect and wise. Strangers have come to our world. They bear instruments we do not understand.
Who are you?
I am Captain Kirk of the starship Enterprise. This is my medical officer, Doctor McCoy. My first officer, Mister Spock.
For what reason do you visit this world?
We've come in friendship.
Then learn what it means to be our enemy before you learn what it means to be our friend.
Spock. (he wakes) Doctor McCoy. Bones. Bones?
The doctor must have received an excessively large electrical shock.
No, that's not it.
Nothing else could've caused this, Captain. At least nothing that has happened here.
You're right, Spock. The shock was serious because of McCoy's weakened condition.
May I ask precisely what is troubling the doctor?
I don't think he would've told you himself, but I think you should know now. It's xenopolycythemia.
Yes. I know of it, Captain.
Then you know that nothing can be done.
Bones, how is it?
I'm all right. Are you all right, Mister Spock?
Very well, Doctor. The Captain and I seem to have suffered no ill effects.
Oh, that Oracle really got to me. I must be especially susceptible to its magic spells.
Spock knows.
Well, we'd better get to the control room.
Are you in any condition to get up?
Don't worry. I can make it, Jim.
Captain, informing these people they're on a ship may be in violation of the Prime Directive of Starfleet Command.
No. The people of Yonada may be changed by the knowledge, but it's better than exterminating them.
Logical, Captain.
And the three billion on Daran Five.
Also logical, Captain.
Gentlemen, I believe we have a visitor.
For strength. Many of us have felt the power of our Oracle. This has been of benefit.
It tastes like an ancient herb derivative.
You are not of Yonada.
No, we're from outside your world.
Where is outside?
Up there. Outside, up there, everywhere.
So they say, also. (he winces in pain) Many years ago I climbed the mountains, even though it is forbidden. (another wince)
Why is it forbidden?
I am not sure. (wince) But things are not as they teach us. For the world is hollow, and I have touched the sky.
What is it, Bones?
There's something under the skin. (a red light goes out) He's dead.
For the world is hollow, and I have touched the sky.
He said it was forbidden to climb the mountains.
Yes, of course it is, because if you did you'd touch the sky and find out that you were living on a big ball. Not a planet, but a spaceship. And that knowledge seems to be forbidden.
What happened?
We don't know. He just suddenly screamed in pain and died.
(to woman) Fetch the guard. (kneels and prays) Forgive him for he was an old man, and old men are sometimes foolish. But it is written that those of the people who sin or speak evil shall be punished. (guards arrive) He served well for many years. Take him away, gently.
You do not seem well. It is distressing to me.
Oh, no. I'm quite all right, thank you.
It is the will of the Oracle that you now be treated as honoured guests.
You seem to be the special favourite.
Indeed, Doctor. The young lady did show a marked preference for your company.
Well, now. Nobody can blame her for that, can they?
Personally, I find the lady's taste questionable, but she obviously prefers you, and you obviously don't seem to mind. If you could arrange to be alone with the young lady, Spock and I would be left alone to find the power controls of this world.
It is time to refresh yourselves.
Thank you, Mister Spock. To our good friends of Yonada.
We are very interested in your world.
That pleases us.
Good. Then you wouldn't mind if we looked around?
Not at all. The people know of you now. (to McCoy) Are you well enough to go about?
Perhaps not.
Then why not remain here? Rest. We will talk.
You are very kind.
You are free to go about and meet our people.
Thank you. And thank you for taking care of Doctor McCoy.
Not at all. We shall make him well.
Mister Spock.
No, thank you.
Leave us.
I'm curious. How did the Oracle punish the old man?
I cannot tell you now.
There is some way the Oracle knows what you say, isn't there?
What we say, what we think. The Oracle knows the minds and the hearts of all the people. I did not know you would be hurt so badly.
It's all right. I suppose we had to learn the power of the Oracle.
McCoy, there is something I must say. Since the moment I. It is not in the manner of the people to hide their feelings.
Honesty is usually wise.
Is there a woman for you?
No, there isn't.
Does McCoy find me attractive?
Oh, yes. Yes, I do.
I hope you men of space, of other worlds, hold truth as dear as we do.
We do.
I wish you to stay here on Yonada as my mate.
But we're strangers to each other.
But is not that the nature of men and women? That the pleasure is in the learning of each other?
Yes.
Let the thought rest in your heart, McCoy.
Incredible as it may seem, these people have no idea they're living on a spaceship.
I wonder how many generations have lived out their lives and been buried here without ever knowing that their world is hollow.
The people, in the fullness of time, will reach a new world. Rich, green, lovely to the eyes, and of a goodness that will fill the hearts of the people with tears of joy. You can share that world with me, rule it by my side.
How long will it take you to reach this new world?
Soon. The Oracle will only say soon.
If you only knew how I needed some kind of future, Natira.
You have lived a lonely life?
Yes, very lonely.
No more, McCoy. There will be no more loneliness for you.
There's something I need to tell you.
There is nothing you need to say.
But there is.
Then tell me, if the telling is such a need.
I have an illness for which there is no cure. I have one year to live.
Until I saw you, there was nothing in my heart. It sustained my life, but nothing more. Now it sings. I could be happy to have that feeling for a day, a week, a month, a year. Whatever the creators hold in store for us.
Captain, the Oracle room.
The problem, to get in.
I believe that I can. (Kirks stops him as women walks past) The writing is definitely Fabrini, Captain. I recognise it.
Fabrini? Didn't the Fabrini sun go nova and destroy its planets?
Yes. Towards the end, the Fabrini people lived underground, as these people do, to protect themselves.
Some of them must have been put aboard this ship and sent to another planet. And these are their descendants. (Once the coast is clear.) Now.
The Oracle doesn't seem to know we're here. I wonder what alerted it the first time.
Captain. If I remember correctly, the oracle's reprehensible conduct was initiated when Natira knelt on that platform.
I think you're right. Continue investigating. The clue to the location of the control room must be around here somewhere.
Nothing here which would indicate this is anything but a planet. There's no question but that the creators would be considered gods.
This plaque is a representation of a star and its solar system.
Eight planets, Captain. That is the number in the Fabrina solar system.
Then there's no doubt these people are the descendants of the Fabrini.
And no doubt they've been in flight on this asteroid ship for ten thousand years.
Speak.
It is I, Natira.
Yes, Natira.
It is written only the high priestess of the people may select her mate.
It is so written.
The strangers among us, the three visitors. There is one called McCoy. I wish him to remain here as my mate.
Does he agree to this?
I have asked him. He has not yet given me his answer.
He must become one of the people, worship the creators, and agree to the insertion of the Instrument of Obedience.
He will be told what must be done.
If he agrees to all things, it is permitted. Teach him our laws carefully so he commits no sacrilege, no offence against the people or the creators.
It will be done, o most wise.
Who are the intruders?
Two of the strangers, Kirk and Spock.
McCoy is not with them?
No.
Kirk and Spock have committed sacrilege. You know what must be done.
I know. (guards run in) When the oracle releases them, take them. Fools. You think we are children? You think you can do as you please, commit whatever offence amuses you?
What are you going to do to my friends?
They entered the Oracle room.
And the punishment is death?
Yes. I can make no other decision. We gave them our trust, they betrayed us.
They acted out of ignorance, Natira.
They said they came in friendship.
Please let them return to the ship.
I cannot.
For me? I've made my decision. I'm staying here, on Yonada. Natira, what they did, they did because they felt they had to. Please, let them return to the ship. You won't regret it. How do you think I'd feel if I stayed here with the chance to be happy for the first time in my life, but knowing my friends had died?
Yes. So be it. This I will do for McCoy. For our happiness and future.
You're returning with us?
No, I'm not.
Bones, this isn't a planet. It's a space ship on a collision course with Daran Five.
I'm on a kind of a collision course myself, Jim.
Doctor McCoy, I order you to return with us.
And I refuse.
Bones, if we can't correct the course of this ship, we'll have to blast it out of space.
I intend to stay on this ship, with these people, whatever happens.
Your decision is most illogical, Doctor.
Is it, Mister Spock? Is it really? Natira's asked me to stay, and I'm staying.
As her husband?
Yes. Is that too much to ask, Jim?
Kirk to Enterprise.
Scott here, Captain.
We're beaming over. Lock in on our signal.
Aye, Captain.
And transport Mister Spock and myself immediately.
But, Captain, what about Doctor McCoy?
He's staying, Scotty. Kirk out.
To become one of the people of Yonada, the Instrument of Obedience must be made part of your flesh. Do you now give your consent?
I do.
Proceed.
Say now, because once done, it is done.
Let it be done.
You are now one with my people. (she kneels beside him) May I give you the love you want, and make the time you have beautiful.
We're now of one mind.
One heart.
One life.
It is done, O most wise. Our living link with the creators.
Teach him, then, what he must know as one of the people.
This is the Book of the People, to be opened and read when we reach the new world of the promise. It was given by the creators.
Do the people know the contents of their book?
Only that it tells of our world here and why soon, one day, we must leave it for the new world.
Has the reason that the people must leave here been revealed to you?
No, it has not.
Don't you long to know its secrets?
No. It is enough for me to know that we shall understand all when we reach our home.
Captain Kirk, I sympathise with your wish to stay, but I hope you recognise the necessity that you continue your mission at once.
That is the problem, sir.
Perhaps haven't made myself clear. Let me restate it. You have been relieved of all responsibility for the asteroid ship Yonada. Starfleet Command will take care of the situation. (end of conversation)
I believe it's time to move on.
Yes. Those are the orders.
Captain Kirk. Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
An urgent call from Doctor McCoy, sir.
Put him on.
Jim.
Yes, Bones.
We may be able to get these people back on course.
You've located the controls?
No, but I've seen the book that contains all the knowledge of the creators. And if you
If you can get to it, Spock
Can dig out the information.
Where is it?
Bones, are you all right?
Bones, answer me! Bones, what is it? (Natira runs in.) Bones, what is it? McCoy, what's happening? What's happening, McCoy?
You are killers of your friend. I will have you put to death.
Help him.
Until you are dead, he will think of you and disobey! I will see you die!
Spock, take care of McCoy.
(in tears) He is not part of our people. You've released him from his vow of obedience.
We have freed him from the cruelty of your Oracle.
McCoy.
Bones. Bones. You said something about a book. Where is it?
They must not know.
The Oracle room.
You will never see the book. It is sacrilege! Guards! Guards! Guards!
Now listen to me. You must listen to what I have to say. Give me one moment to speak to you. One moment. Natira, if you don't believe what I'm about to tell you, you can call the guards. We'll accept any punishment you decree.
What do you wish to say?
You must believe that what I'm about to tell you is the truth.
Your truth, of your world.
Yes, my world and your world of Yonada.
You don't obey the law of the creators. How can you understand my world?
I understand. I understand, Natira. Ten thousand years ago, a sun was dying and with it, its world. It's the world you see on the plaque in the room of the Oracle.
That is a world of which Yonada is a part.
No. It is the world of your ancestors, your creators. It no longer exists.
You are mad.
No, I'm not. Now listen to me! Hear me out. When your ancestors discovered that their world was dying they built a great ship and chose their best people. They wished for their race to survive. They sent the ship out into space.
You wish me to believe that Yonada is a ship?
Yes.
But we have a sun. It did not die. At night I see the stars.
No. You are living inside a hollow ball. Your ancestors created it to take you on a journey to a promised new planet.
Why should the (she gets a pain) Why should the truth wait for you to come to Yonada?
Because a flaw developed in the controls. And unless we correct it, Yonada will kill millions of people and destroy a world it doesn't even know.
Why should the truth be kept from us? Why should the creators keep us in darkness? No. No, you do not speak the truth. I believe only the Oracle. I believe!
Let us remove the instrument of obedience, the way we did for McCoy. Natira.
Do you think she understood me?
She evidently understood something. There are no guards to detain us.
You have listened to the words of the non-believers.
Yes. I have listened.
That was the first transgression. You felt the pain of warning?
Yes, I did.
Why did you listen further?
They said they spoke the truth.
Their truth.
Is truth not truth for all?
The truth of Yonada is your truth. There can be no other for you. Repent your disobedience.
I must know the truth of the world!
Your friends have told me of your world.
They spoke the truth.
I believe you. I believe. The creators kept us in darkness. There's nothing I can do. I believe with you, husband.
Is she all right?
She will be. I'll stay here with her. The book is in the monolith.
It is sacrilege to the temple.
We do this for the survival of the people of Yonada.
You are not believers. You are forbidden to gaze at the book.
We mean no desecration to the faith of Yonada. We must consult the book to help you.
It is blasphemy. You are forbidden. The punishment is death.
Temperature one hundred eleven degrees and rising.
McCoy, how do you open this thing?
Temperature one hundred fifteen degrees.
Press the three lower planets on the left-hand side simultaneously.
One hundred twenty degrees.
Here. The plan must be in there. Is it indexed?
Yes, it is.
Hurry, Spock.
It refers to the altar. Apply pressure to the centre until it opens.
Let's get her out of the heat.
I've neutralised the heating elements.
We'll be all right here now, Jim.
The oracle can no longer punish us.
Your friends have prevented it?
Yes.
And will they send this this ship again to the land the creators intended?
Yes.
That is good.
Active and functional. Not too different from the Enterprise.
There seems to be a weakness in one of the eight tubes.
Enough to turn it off course?
Yes. Let me check that engine. A very simple problem, easy to correct.
Then come.
No.
Don't be afraid.
I do not fear the punishment of disobedience.
No, I cannot go with you. It is not fear. I understand the great purpose of the creators. I shall honour it.
You intend to stay here, on Yonada?
I shall stay willingly, and because that is what I must do.
Then I won't leave you.
Will McCoy stay here to die? No. McCoy will not let go of life and the fullness of years.
Now more than ever, I wish to search through the universe to find a cure for myself and others like me. And I want you to be with me.
This is my universe. You came here with a great mission to save my people. Shall I abandon them? Perhaps one day, if it is permitted, you will find Yonada again.
I believe we can attempt the course correction, Captain.
Good. Going back to marked headings.
Guidance control's taking over. I believe we can allow this ship to go back to its automatic control.
Steadying on course marked in red.
(spotting shelves of discs) Captain. Intelligence files. Their banks contain the total knowledge of the Fabrini, ready for the people to consult when they arrive at their destination. (scans them) And they seem to have amassed a great deal of medical knowledge.
Excellent, Doctor. The white corpuscle count is back to normal.
Your haemoglobin count is back to normal, Doctor, which indicates that the flow of oxygen to each cell of your body is back up to its abundantly energetic level.
Thank you, Mister Spock, for bringing back the knowledge of the Fabrini.
Doctor McCoy, the Fabrini descendants are scheduled to debark on their promised planet in approximately three hundred and ninety days. I think that we could manage to be in that vicinity at that time, if you wanted to thank the Fabrini personally.
The Tholian Web
Captain, we are registering very curious readings from all sensors.
Specify.
I cannot. According to our instruments, space itself is literally breaking up. There is no known phenomenon which would account for these readings.
What about sensor failure?
Negative. I have run a complete check on all systems.
Captain. We're losing power in the warp engines.
How bad is it?
We can barely read it, but I don't like the looks of it. And I cannot find out the cause.
Captain. Visual detection of an object dead ahead.
How about it, Spock?
Fascinating.
Explain.
There is virtually no sensor contact. No mass analysis. No trace of radiation. We see it, but our sensors indicate it is not there.
The Defiant! Mister Sulu, impulse engines only. Close to transporter range.
Aye, aye, sir.
Lieutenant, open up a hailing frequency.
I've been trying to raise them, sir. There is no response.
Just within transporter range, sir.
Good. Maintain position. Mister Spock, Mister Chekov, come with me. Doctor McCoy, report to the transporter room immediately. Scotty, you have the conn.
Aye, sir.
Energise.
Has there ever been a mutiny on a starship before?
Absolutely no record of such an occurrence, Ensign.
Jim. The Captain's neck is broken.
The ship is still functioning, Captain. It is logical to assume the mutineers are somewhere aboard.
Use the ship's sensors to locate them. Kirk to Enterprise.
Scott here, sir.
Prepare to beam over a full security squad on my orders.
Aye, aye, Captain.
Captain, there is no sign of life aboard this vessel.
Odd, Mister Spock. Very odd. Spock, you stay here with me. Chekov, get down to Engineering and life support systems. Doctor McCoy, check out the Sickbay. Kirk to Enterprise. Cancel the security squad and stand by for further instructions.
Aye, aye, Captain. Standing by.
I can't get an accurate fix on the Defiant, Mister Scott, but I know it's drifting away from us. Shall I correct for range, sir?
Aye, I think you're right. Keep us within beaming range, but not too close.
Captain.
Report, Mister Chekov.
Just like what I found in life support. All dead.
Get back up here.
Kirk to McCoy.
McCoy here.
Bones, can you tell me what they all died of?
I'd say these people killed each other.
They what?
You heard correctly, Jim. These people killed each other.
Could mental disease have infected all of the crew?
According to the ship's log, the medical surgeon down here didn't even know what was going on.
The best I can do is get all the readings I can get and analyse them later.
What the devil?
Bones, what is it?
Bones, what is it? Answer me!
Answer me!
Jim, this ship is dissolving. My hand just passed through a man
And a table.
Get up here on the double.
Mister Scott, the Defiant. It's starting to disappear.
Bridge to transporter room.
You got that transporter working yet, Mister?
Take over, Mister Sulu. I'll be in the transporter room.
Aye, aye, sir.
Captain, the Defiant's sensors correspond with an extremely high degree of correlation to those of the Enterprise.
You mean what happened to the Defiant might be happening to the Enterprise?
Affirmative.
Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott.
Scott here.
Mister Scott, stand by to beam us back.
I can't, sir. At least, not all at once.
Why not? What's happened?
Everything. That ship you're in is fading out, and it's ripping the innards out of this one.
It's jamming our transporter frequencies. I've only got three of them working, and I'm not sure of those. One of you has got to wait.
Chekov, McCoy, prepare for transportation. You, too, Spock.
Request permission to remain, Captain. I could be completing the data.
Request denied.
Captain, there is a chance
I know what the chances are. Mister Spock, don't argue. Get back with the information. I'll be right there. Scotty, energise transporter.
Aye.
Energise.
It's gone. The Defiant just vanished.
Anything?
Negative.
That's it. I've done all I can. There's nothing out there to grab a hold of and bring in. When that ship went, it must have taken the Captain with it.
Computer working.
Compute the next period of spatial interphase.
Next interphase two hours twelve minutes.
Two hours and twelve minutes? That power leak has unbalanced the ship and she's starting to drift. I can't hold her in place that long.
We must try, Mister Scott. The fabric of space is very weak here. If we disturb it, there will be no chance of retrieving the Captain alive.
I don't understand what's so special about this region of space.
Well, picture it this way, Mister Chekov. We exist in a universe which co-exists with a multitude of others in the same physical space. At certain brief periods of time, an area of their space overlaps an area of ours. That is a time of interphase, during which we can connect with the Defiant's universe.
Mister Spock? We will be able to retrieve the Captain at that time, won't we?
Yes. However, the dimensional structure of each universe is totally dissimilar. Any use of power disturbs it. If we are not extremely careful, we shall lose the Captain and become trapped ourselves.
I see.
And die like him?
Chekov! Chekov!
Security guards to the Bridge.
Aye, sir.
What happened, Mister Spock?
I was attempting to explain to Mister Chekov the nature of our problems in this situation when he attacked.
Did anyone notice anything peculiar in his behaviour before this?
I think he had several spasms of pain.
Did he seem to be getting hysterical?
Doctor, he seemed more angry than frightened.
He had no cause to be angry.
Take Mister Chekov to Sickbay. Put him under restraint.
Lieutenant Uhura is correct. There was murderous fury in Chekov. The same fury which was evident in the Defiant.
That's what I was afraid of. Whatever it was that drove the crew of the Defiant to murder each other could be communicable.
Is there anything you need to isolate the cause?
Time. By the way, Mister Spock, I think it might be a wise precaution to put some distance between us and the Defiant.
If we are to recover the Captain, we must not move.
How long will that take?
Approximately two hours before the attempt can be made.
Spock, are you sure that Jim is still alive?
The Captain was caught in our transporter beam when the Defiant phased out. It is possible he was spared the shock of transition and survived. However, if we are to recover him, we must catch him at the precise moment during the next interphase, or he will die. And there can be no margin for error. His environmental unit can provide breathable air for no more than three point six two hours.
Mister Spock. A vessel approaching on an intercept vector.
Status, Mister Sulu.
Range two hundred thousand kilometres. Velocity zero point five one C.
Lieutenant Uhura, signal Red Alert.
Aye, sir. Red Alert. All decks, go to Red Alert.
They've stopped dead, sir. Range ninety thousand kilometres and holding.
Mister Spock? I'm receiving a visual signal.
Transfer to main viewer.
Aye, sir.
I am Commander Loskene. You are trespassing in a territorial annex of the Tholian Assembly. You must leave this area immediately.
Spock, in command of the Federation star ship Enterprise. Commander, according to the Federation, this area is free space.
We claim this territory and are prepared to use force, if necessary, to protect our property.
We are not interested in your display of force. The Enterprise is responding to a distress signal from one of our ships and is currently engaged in rescue operations. Do you wish to assist us?
I find no evidence of a disabled ship. My instruments indicate ours are the only two vessels in this area.
The other ship is interspatially trapped. It should reappear in one hour and fifty three minutes. We request you stand by until then.
Very well, Enterprise. In the interest of interstellar amity, we will wait precisely one hour and fifty three minutes. But be correct. We do not tolerate deceit.
If we could only find the proper filtering agent, we might be able to solve this problem. Negative. It's the third failure.
Nurse, take this sample and run an analysis on it.
Yes, Doctor.
Bridge to transporter room.
Transporter room here.
Ready for interphase in twenty seconds.
Doctor McCoy!
Thank you, nurse. Call security. I want to have some checks run on this man.
Lock on to Captain Kirk's co-ordinates
And prepare to bring him aboard, Mister Scott.
Bring him aboard, Mister Scott.
I'm trying. Captain Kirk is not on his designated co-ordinates, Mister Spock.
Well, keep trying, Mister Scott.
Lieutenant Sulu, evaluation.
Sensor readings are not corresponding to those we received the last time we saw the Defiant.
It's possible the Tholian entry into the area has disturbed the space, and if that has occurred
McCoy to Bridge.
Spock here.
Has the Captain been beamed aboard yet?
Negative, Doctor.
When is that interphase going to happen?
Theoretically it already has happened, Doctor.
However, the ship's sensors are not responding as predicted.
I thought you had the thing timed out.
I did, Doctor. The space was disturbed by the Tholians.
You mean you don't know whether you're going to be able to recover the Captain or not?
Not at this interphase.
I shall have to recalculate to determine when the next interphase will occur. They do not take place at regular intervals.
You can't wait for the next one. We've had another case like Chekov.
I had to confine my orderly to sickbay.
I have confidence that you will soon isolate the cause, Doctor, and prevent further spread of the affliction.
The disease is not transmitted by the men, Mister Spock. The cause is the area of space we're in. It's affecting the whole crew.
The molecular structure of the brain tissues in the central nervous system are distorting.
And the madness that affected the Defiant's crew will soon happen to the Enterprise.
Now you've got to get this ship out of here.
Mister Spock, we're being fired upon.
The renowned Tholian punctuality.
Mister Spock, damage control report. Minor structural damage to sections A4 and C13.
Engineering, hold power steady and cut off all unnecessary expenditures. Mister Sulu, divert all but emergency maintenance power to the shields.
But sir, that'll reduce our phaser power by fifty percent.
Mister Spock!
Scott to Bridge!
Spock here.
I know you don't like to use the phasers, but you've got to do something about that ship out there.
Understood. Lieutenant Uhura, open a channel to the Tholian ship. Mister Sulu, lock in phaser tracking controls.
Phasers locked in, sir.
There's no response on any frequency, sir.
What's the use of this battle, Spock? You've lost Jim. Take this ship out of here.
Ready, Mister Sulu?
Ready, Mister Spock.
Fire.
A hit, Mister Spock.
Engineering, status report. Mister Scott?
Spock, that hit from the Tholians has fused our power supply converters.
I can't do a thing with the Enterprise now.
She's bound to drift, maybe right through that doorway out there.
Can you estimate minimum time required for repair?
I don't even know if she can be repaired.
Are you satisfied? Spock, why did you do it?
The decision to fight was logical. Lack of time prevented any other course of action. The Tholian ship had to be disabled.
You should've known what could've happened and done everything in your power to safeguard your crew. That is the mark of a starship Captain, like Jim.
Doctor, I hardly believe this is the time for comparisons. Please go to your laboratory and search for an antidote to the effects of this space. That is your primary task, since we must remain here.
Mister Spock, something has just entered sensor range. It's another Tholian, sir. Loskene must've contacted them when he tried to intercept us.
Fascinating.
Shall I lock in remaining phaser power, sir?
Negative. Lieutenant Uhura, can you open a channel to the approaching vessel?
They're refusing reception. I can't
Distance, Mister Sulu.
Just beyond phaser range, sir.
What is that?
Mister Sulu, I shall run an analysis on those filaments. Tie in all sensors to the ship's library computer console. Switch scanners.
Yes, sir.
There's no analogy to this structure in Federation technology. It is, however, an energy field, and if the Tholians are successful in completing this structure before we have completed our repairs, we shall not see home again.
Doctor, your last report on an antidote on the effects of this space was negative.
It's still negative, Mister Spock. Theragen is the most promising substance tested so far. We're progressing.
The urgency requires your personal attention in the laboratory.
My staff is working around the clock. My being there will not affect the biochemistry of any of the tests. This service requires my personal attention, Mister Spock.
A few hours ago, the Captain elected to remain on board the Defiant so that three members of this crew would have the best chance of returning safely to the Enterprise. His concern was not only for them, but for all the members of the crew of this ship. You all know the sequence of events. We were fired upon by the Tholian ship. At that time, Captain Kirk may have been alive. I deemed it necessary to return the Tholian fire for the safety of the Enterprise. The Tholian ship has been disabled. But as a result of the battle, we must accept the fact that Captain Kirk is no longer alive.
Take him to Sickbay. Put him in restraint.
I shall not attempt to voice the quality of respect and admiration which Captain Kirk commanded. Each of you must evaluate the loss in the privacy of your own thoughts.
Attention. (a respectful pause) Dismissed.
There is a duty to be performed in the Captain's quarters, which requires our presence.
It can wait, Doctor. My duties require my immediate presence on the bridge.
The Captain left a message tape. It was his order that it be reviewed by both of us, should he ever be declared dead. You have just declared Jim dead.
It will wait for a more suitable moment, Doctor.
Why? Are you afraid it'll change your present status?
The mental and physical state of this crew are your responsibility, Doctor. At the moment, they are your top priority.
The Captain's last order is top priority, and you will honour that order before you take over.
(looking at a medal) He was a hero in every sense of the word, yet his life was sacrificed for nothing. The one thing that would have given his death meaning is the safety of the Enterprise. Now you've made that impossible, Mister Spock.
We came here for a specific purpose, Doctor.
Maybe not the same one. I really came here to find out why you stayed and fought.
The Captain would have remained to recover a crew member at the risk of his own life or even his own ship.
Yes, he would, Mister Spock, but you didn't have that decision to make. What would you gain by fighting the Tholians? You could have assured yourself of a captaincy by leaving the area. But you chose to stay. Why?
I need not explain my rationale to you or any other member of this crew. There is a margin of variation in any experiment. While there was a chance, I was bound legally and morally to ascertain the Captain's status.
You mean to be sure if he was dead. Well, you made certain of that.
That is enough, Doctor. We both have other things to do.
Yes, I have something to do. If this crew is to survive, I have to find an antidote to this space you've locked us into.
You will return to your duty as soon as we've discharged our responsibilities here.
There's no hurry, Mister Spock. The antidote probably doesn't concern you. Vulcans are probably immune, so just take your time.
I must admit I don't understand you, Spock, but I just can't believe that you would want Jim's command. You must know that if you get us out of this situation, they'll pin a medal on your chest and give you command of the Enterprise.
Doctor, I am in command of the Enterprise.
I would like to remedy that situation.
If you believe I have acted irregularly, then relieve me of duty. That is your prerogative as medical officer of this ship.
Bones, Spock. since you are playing this tape, we will assume that I am dead, that the tactical situation is critical, and both of you are locked in mortal combat. It means, Spock, that you have control of the ship and are probably making the most difficult decisions of your career. I can offer only one small piece of advice, for whatever it's worth. Use every scrap of knowledge and logic you have to save the ship. But temper your judgment with intuitive insight. I believe you have those qualities, but if you can't find them in yourself, seek out McCoy. Ask his advice. And if you find it sound, take it. Bones, you've heard what I've just told Spock. Help him if you can. But remember he is the Captain. His decisions must be followed without question. You might find that he is capable of human insight and human error. They are most difficult to defend, but you will find that he is deserving of the same loyalty and confidence each of you have given me. Take care.
Spock, I, er, I'm sorry. It does hurt, doesn't it?
What would you have me say, Doctor?
Spock here.
Mister Spock, we have a readout on the Tholian tractor field. I think we can estimate its approximate completion time.
I shall be there shortly. Doctor, I believe we each have our respective tasks to complete before the Tholians complete theirs.
Captain! Captain Kirk, we thought you were
Spock! Mister. Oh, Doctor I've just seen the Captain.
Of course you have, Uhura. We would all like to
He's alive. He's alive, Doctor.
Of course.
Believe me, I did see him. I did. Spock! Mister Spock!
We're going to Sickbay.
Doctor. Doctor, I'm not going mad. I did see Captain Kirk. I've got to get to Mister Spock.
Scott to Captain.
Scott to Captain.
Spock here. Proceed, Mister Scott.
One of our crewmen just went berserk, but we have him under control for the moment.
Report to Doctor McCoy all symptoms noted prior to the attack.
Spock out.
Doctor McCoy,
Yes, Nurse.
I have the diagnosis of the crewman who attacked engineer Scott. It was definitely due to the deteriorative effects of interspace.
Yes, it's beginning to spread generally throughout the ship.
Are we any closer, Doctor?
No, except I'm positive that it's a theragen derivative that's the answer. And it better be the next one.
Mister Spock didn't believe me either, did he, Doctor?
Well, nobody saw him but you, Uhura.
Then I didn't really see him, did I?
I don't think so.
Will I become like Chekov, Doctor?
No, no. We're working hard. We'll find an antidote.
We're beginning to interphase.
Scott to Bridge.
Bridge. Spock here.
Are we slipping into interspace?
Negative. We are relatively stable at the moment.
Why do you ask?
I don't believe it.
What is it, Mister Scott?
Mister Scott?
Mister Spock.
I've just seen Captain Kirk. He was standing there as plain as we are.
And then he just disappeared.
Report to the bridge immediately.
Sounds like a horror story. Suppose there's any truth in it?
In critical moments, men sometimes see exactly what they wish to see.
Do you suppose they're seeing Jim because they've lost confidence in you?
I was merely stating a fact, Doctor.
It's getting critical. There have been a number of assaults down on the lower decks. Even Scotty's being affected. If Scotty goes under, that's the finish of whatever chance we have of getting the Enterprise out of here.
Please leave that to me, Doctor McCoy. I realise that the crew are your prime concern. You can best serve them in your laboratory. I urge you to confine yourself to it until a remedy has been found.
Spock! It must be this space. It's getting to me too. I know it's nothing you've done, Spock. I, I'm sorry.
I understand, Doctor. I'm sure the Captain would simply have said forget it, Bones.
Mister Spock, look!
Captain? Captain? Captain.
Am I all right, Doctor?
Yes, Uhura, you're fine.
Then what I saw
It was real.
Captain Kirk's alive?
We all saw him. The Captain's still alive.
Nurse Chapel to Doctor McCoy.
McCoy here.
Results of the last theragen test are ready for you, Doctor.
I'll be right there.
Then your fears about that phaser were correct. It blasted a hole right through that crazy space fabric, and only heaven knows where it sent the Defiant.
Exactly. But the Captain remained. Only the overlap time changed. The next interphase will occur here.
Can you be ready?
That'll be about twenty minutes. Aye, she'll be back together. But we'll only have about eighty percent power built up.
It will have to do, Mister Scott. (door buzzer) Come.
What have you got there?
Compliments of the house. To your good health and the health of the crew.
You've found the antidote, Doctor.
Yes, and I've ordered it orally or intravenously for everyone aboard the ship. I would like for you gentlemen to drink it down.
Ensign Chekov was affected so early. Has he responded to it?
He's his smiling self again. I've discharged him from Sickbay.
What is it?
It's a diluted theragen derivative.
Theragen? A nerve gas used by the Klingons.
Aye. And deadly, too. What are you thinking of, Doc? Are you trying to kill us all?
If I remember correctly, it caused fatality only when used in pure form.
That's right, and in this derivative, mixed with alcohol, it merely deadens certain nerve inputs to the brain.
Oh, well, any decent brand of Scotch will do that.
One good slug of this, and you can hit a man with phaser stun, and he'd never feel it or even know it.
Does it make a good mix with Scotch?
It should.
I'll let you know. (leaves with the remaining contents of the flask)
Well, drink it down, Spock. It's the human thing to do. That's a medical order, Captain.
Welcome back, Lieutenant.
Thank you, sir.
Your absence was keenly felt, Mister Chekov.
Thank you, Mister Spock.
Estimated time for completion of the Tholian web.
Two minutes, sir.
Are the ships computers programmed for entry into interspace?
Yes, sir. The ship can drive into interspace at any time.
Spock to engineering.
Scott here.
Prepare for interphase in
Fifteen seconds.
Aye, sir. Standing by.
Mister Spock, they're closing the web.
Interphase in ten seconds. Nine, eight
Seven, six, five
Stand by with full power.
Four, three
She's only up to seventy six percent.
It will have to do.
One.
Ready to transport on my order.
I see him.
There he is!
It's the Captain. Sir, the tractor field is activating.
We're being pulled out of here.
Try to maintain position Mister Sulu.
I can't, sir.
Engineering, bring ship's power up to full capability.
Where are we now, Mister Spock?
Captain, we have destroyed the Tholians' web.
Negative, Ensign. Utilising ship's power has thrown us clear of it. Compute the distance from the original location.
At once, sir.
Have we lost the Captain?
We shall soon see, Lieutenant.
The ship has been thrown exactly two point seven two parsecs distant from our previous position.
Good. Since the Captain was locked into our transporter beam when we were thrown clear of the interphase area, he should've been drawn here with us. Spock to transporter room.
McCoy here.
The Captain's oxygen supply is running out now. Are you standing by with a hypo of tri-ox compound for him?
I'm ready, Mister Spock.
Prepare to transport on the Captain's co-ordinates on my order.
Mister Spock, it's him! It's the Captain!
I see him, Ensign. I see him. Now, Doctor.
Bones.
Welcome home, Jim.
I had a whole universe to myself after the Defiant was thrown out. There was absolutely no one else in it. I must say I prefer a crowded universe much better. How did you two get along without me?
Oh, we managed. Mister Spock gave the orders, and I found the answers.
Good. No problems between you?
None worth reporting, Captain.
Try me.
Only such minor disturbances as are inevitable when humans are involved.
Which humans, Mister Spock?
He means when humans become involved with Vulcans, Jim.
Ah, yes. I understand. Well, I hope my last orders were helpful in solving any problems that you don't feel worth reporting.
Orders, Captain?
What orders are you referring to, Jim?
My last orders. The last orders that I left for both of you. The last taped orders.
Oh, those orders. Well, there wasn't time. We never had a chance to listen to them.
No. You see, the crisis was upon us, and then passed so quickly, Captain, that we
Good. Good. Well, I hope we won't have similar opportunities to test those orders which you never heard. Ahead warp factor two, Mister Sulu.
Warp factor two, sir.
Plato's Stepchildren
(echoy voice and a huge shadow on the wall) Are you from the spaceship Enterprise?
That's right.
Alexander, at your service. I sing, I dance, I play all variety of games, and I'm a good loser, a very good loser. Please, sir, try to bear that in mind. Now, would you please accompany me?
Who are the inhabitants of this planet?
Oh, Platonians. I'm sure you've never heard of us. Our native star is Sahndara. Millennia ago, just before it went nova, we managed to escape. Our leader liked Plato's ideas Plato, Platonius. See? In fact, our present philosopher-king, Parmen, sometimes calls us Plato's children, although we sometimes think of ourselves more as Plato's stepchildren. Excuse me. Someone's waiting for you.
Welcome to our republic. Whom among you is the physician?
I am. What's the problem?
My spouse. His leg. Come this way.
Well, what happened to that leg?
I suppose I scratched it.
I don't understand. This should have been attended to immediately.
Sheer ignorance. Is there anything you can do?
Well, we're certainly going to try. The infection is massive. Let me give you a hypo to ease the pain.
Where?
In the arm.
Philana, they came to help. They deserve better than to die.
Alexander, you talk too much.
What is it? What is your prognosis, Doctor?
I'll let you know when I have the results. And from now on, it would be better if I handled the instruments without your help.
Bones, I can't understand why a simple cut like that could become so serious.
Neither do I, but it has. How do I knock out an infection when the tricorder doesn't show any information on Platonius bacteria? All I can do, and this is going to take time, is to try to match his bugs with a known strain and hope.
Your Pan is in jeopardy.
(moving an Urn by thought) It isn't now. I win.
Well played, Eraclitus.
I thank you, Dioniyde.
Two and a half. Ever since our arrival here on Platonius.
How is the power transmitted?
Brain waves.
Do these waves cease while you are asleep?
No, not if they're embedded in the unconscious.
What about medicine? Why no doctors?
We haven't had any pressing need for the medical arts. You see, while still on Sahndara, we instituted a mass eugenics programme. We're the result. Pared down to a population of thirty eight, we're perfect for our utopia. We're bred for contemplation and self-reliance. And longevity. How old would you say I am? Don't be afraid. I'm not vain.
Thirty five.
That old? I stopped aging at thirty. Well, anyway, you're off by two thousand years. I'm two thousand three hundred years old. We were married very young. I was only a hundred and seventeen, and he was a hundred and twenty eight. So you see, we scarcely have to move anymore, let alone work.
That's why you have no resistance?
That's right. A break in the skin or a cut can be fatal.
Fascinating. I believe we're experiencing the psychokinetic manifestations of Parmen's delirium.
Scott to Captain Kirk.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Captain, we're in the midst of a storm.
No discernible cause, and I've never seen anything like it. There's
Ten scale turbulence right now. Emergency gyros and stabilisers at maximum.
If this keeps up, Captain, we can't last!
Engines at full speed. Get her out of orbit and into space.
I've tried that, sir. She's locked tight.
Then there's nothing you can do but batten down and weather.
Right, Captain.
Parmen's mind is not (something flies past them very fast) Watch it! He's not only throwing around furniture, he's tearing up the Enterprise as well. Bones, knock him out fast.
Help! Save me!
Alexander. Stand behind me.
His mind will find me anyhow. Don't save him. Let him die. The others will kill each other trying to take his place.
Hurry up with that shot!
Now, Doctor!
(apparently throttling himself) I can't breathe. I'm choking.
Bones! Shake him. Break his concentration.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Scott on the Enterprise.
It's all right, Captain. The turbulence has abated.
Good. I think you'll find the orbit lock is broken as well. Assess damage and repair whatever is necessary.
Aye, Captain.
I don't know how I can ever thank you, not only for Platonius, but for myself.
No thanks is necessary.
Alexander, show our guests to the south wing.
Oh, thank you, we must return to the ship.
I think I'd better wait until the fever breaks.
Well, in that case, we'll stay.
Anything you want, Just ask me. Anything.
Thank you, Alexander.
Think nothing of it. You saved my life. I think I should tell you that
Tell me what?
Well, just that I never knew any people like you existed.
Where is everyone?
They're all in chambers, meditating.
Alexander, are there other Platonians like you?
What do you mean, like me?
Who don't have the psychokinetic ability.
I thought you were talking about my size, because they make fun of me for my size. But, to answer your question, I'm the only one without it. I was brought here as the court buffoon. That's why I'm everybody's slave and I have to be ten places at once, and I never do anything right.
How does one obtain the power?
As far as I know it just comes to you sometime after you're born. They say I'm a throwback, and I am, and so are you. I'm sorry. I shouldn't have said that.
Don't worry about it. We're happy without it.
You know, I believe you are. Listen, where you come from, are there a lot of people without the power and my size?
Alexander, where I come from, size, shape, or colour makes no difference, and nobody has the power.
Nobody? Somebody wants me.
Captain, it will be very gratifying to leave here.
That might not be easy should Parmen die.
Even if he shouldn't.
Yes. This utopia of theirs is one of the best-kept secret in the galaxy. Screening themselves from our sensors, locking us into orbit. All this adds up to a pattern.
Jim, my concoction actually worked. The fever's broken. And what recuperative powers. The infection's begun to drain already.
Doctor McCoy, you may yet cure the common cold.
If ever there was a time to get out of here, it is now. Kirk to Enterprise. Scotty, come in.
Scott here, sir.
Prepare to beam us up.
I'm afraid I can't do that, sir. Everything's frozen.
The turbulence hit you that hard?
It's not the turbulence, sir. Damage to the ship is minimal.
What caused it?
I don't know, sir, and those are the facts.
Did you get up into space?
No, sir. The orbit's locked tighter than ever.
And subspace communication with Starfleet, it's completely severed.
All right, Scotty. I'll handle it down here. Stand by.
Great Pan sounds his horn. Marking time to the rhyme with his hoof, with his hoof. Forward, forward in our plan. We proceed as we began.
Your Excellency.
Parmen will do. Philosopher kings have no need of titles.
I would like to know why the ship's instrumentation and weaponry is frozen, and why the Enterprise is locked in orbit.
Captain, please. You are mistaken, I assure you.
Parmen, I've talked to the engineer aboard the ship. We've showed our good faith. Now you show yours. I want this ship released immediately.
The amenities, Captain. Allow me to remind you that I am the head of this principality. Guests do not come barging in here, making demands and issuing orders.
Guests? You don't know the meaning of the word. Guests aren't treated like common prisoners.
Do not take that tone with me.
Kirk to Enterprise. Acknowledge. Acknowledge. Enterprise, come in. Enterprise. I can't raise them.
Obviously Parmen does not wish any contact made with the Enterprise.
He may still need the ship's medical stores. Why prevent contact?
To shut out any knowledge of his brutal treatment of a Starfleet captain.
No, Mister Spock. One thing for certain. Parmen is not concerned with my dignity or safety.
Agreed, Captain. And Parmen wouldn't have treated you so brutally if he had any intention of releasing you or the Enterprise.
Where are you going?
I don't know. I don't want to go, but I can't help myself.
Gentle spacemen, we are eternally in your debt. We've some trifles for you. Please accept them as tokens of our gratitude. They stem from the very source of our inspiration. To our noble captain, the shield carried by Pericles, as a symbol of gallant leadership.
To our silent and cerebral Mister Spock, this kithara to pluck music, to soothe his ever-active brow.
And lastly, to the physician Doctor McCoy, who saved Platonius and my spouse, this ancient collection of Greek cures, penned by Hippocrates himself.
Has the Enterprise been released yet?
Captain, wait. I know what you're thinking. My humble apologies. You were badly used. In my own defence, allow me to say that my illness was more profoundly disturbing that I myself realised. I am sure that you, too, have been out of sorts and have been driven to fits of temper and rage. Unlike you, however, what I think and feel, whether for good or ill, is instantly translated into reality. So please, find it in your heart to forgive me.
Certainly. Has the Enterprise been released yet?
It will be shortly.
Then good day, and thank you for the presents.
Not at all. But there is one final request. After my nearly fatal infection, it has become obvious to us all that we cannot afford to be without a skilled physician. Therefore we should like you, Doctor McCoy, to remain.
I'm very sorry, but that's impossible.
Your duties will be extraordinarily light. You'll be free to read, meditate, conduct research, whatever you like. You'll want for nothing.
The answer is no.
We should like to keep it cordial, but we are determined to have you stay, Doctor.
Doctor McCoy saved your life.
I am losing patience, Captain.
And you consider yourself a disciple of Plato?
We manage to live in peace and harmony.
Whose harmony? Yours? Plato wanted truth and beauty, and above all, justice.
My dear Mister Spock, I admit that circumstances have forced us to make a few adaptations of Plato, but ours is the most democratic society conceivable. Anyone can, at any moment, be or do anything he wishes, even to becoming ruler of Platonius if his mind is strong enough.
And if his mind isn't strong enough, he gets torn apart like Alexander.
Oh, come now. We are not children. In your culture, justice is the will of the stronger. It is forced upon people by means of weapons and fleets of spaceships. Our justice is the will of the stronger mind, and I for one, consider it a vast improvement.
We don't use our weapons for the kind of brutality you practice.
Farewell, Captain.
Come on, Doctor. McCoy.
I can't move, Jim. They're going to keep me here no matter what. Leave, please.
No. You're the doctor. They don't want to force you. They need your goodwill. They're trying
Captain, go while you still can.
We're not leaving until McCoy is released.
This is not the Enterprise. You are not in command, captain.
Why even discuss it? Get rid of them.
No, my dear. That might offend the good doctor. You wish to stay? By all means. You can help us celebrate our anniversary. In the process, I hope we can persuade you to join our tiny republic.
You won't persuade me.
I think we will.
I'm Tweedledee, he's Tweedledum.
Two spacemen marching to a drum.
You're not staying, McCoy. No matter what he tries to
Being your slave, what should I do but tend upon the hours and times of your desire? I have no precious time at all to spend, nor services to do, till you
Stop it! Don't do this to him, Parmen!
McCoy. No matter what he makes me say or do, the answer's no.
No, Parmen! Stop it!
Well, Doctor?
I have my orders.
As you wish, Doctor.
Is this your utopia, your grand vision of the future? You don't even (screams)
We've had enough or your moralising.
And we've had too much of yours. I'll never get me to stay here.
You will be happy to stay. It takes a little time, Doctor, but you will be happy to stay.
He's a Vulcan. You can't force emotion out of him.
You must be joking, Doctor.
You'll destroy him.
We can't let him die laughing, can we?
I beg you.
Spock. Spock. Don't let them break you. Hold on. Don't
Parmen, they saved your life. I'm ashamed to be a Platonian. Ashamed!
How can you let this go on?
Can you do anything for him?
There is no medicine that can help him. He'll have to come through this himself.
I trust they did not injure you too much, Captain.
My muscles are sore, that's all.
The humiliation must have been most difficult for you to bear. I can understand.
The release of emotions, Mister Spock, is what keeps us healthy. Emotionally healthy, that is.
That may be, Doctor. However, I have noted that the healthy release of emotion is frequently very unhealthy for those closest to you.
Which just goes to prove that there's no such thing as a perfect solution.
So it would seem. Captain.
Yes, Spock.
Do you still feel anger toward Parmen?
Great anger.
And you, Doctor?
Yes, Spock. And hatred.
Then you must release it, gentlemen, as I must master mine. I might have seriously injured you, Captain, even killed you. They have evoked such great hatred in me, I cannot allow it to go further. I must master it. I must control.
Jim. This is senseless. I've thought it over. I'm staying.
You can't.
Parmen has promised me you'll be safe.
Promised? Parmen? He'd let us beam up to the Enterprise, and plunge the ship back into the atmosphere.
Why? Why trick me?
Because, if he killed us outright in front of you, you'd retaliate. You're a doctor. You have the means. Bones, I know you're trying to do the right thing, but if any one of us escaped, Parmen knows Starfleet would never let this planet go unpunished. Sacrifice yourself by agreeing to stay, and you sign our death warrant.
He's right. I should have warned you. They were treating you the same way they treat me. Just like me, only you fight them. All the time, I thought it was me, my mind that couldn't move a pebble. They even told I was lucky they bothered keep me around at all, and I believed them. The arms and legs of everybody's whim. Look down, don't meet their eyes. Smile. Smile. These great people, they were gods to me. But you showed me what they really are. And now I know, don't you see. It's not me, it's not my size, it's them! It's them! It's them!
Put it down.
No. This is the best thing for them.
Put it down. Do what I say.
I'm going to cut their I'm going to cut them. Parmen first, and they'll all get infected. But this time, listen, whatever they say, don't save them. Let them die.
Give it to me!
At least let me give them a taste of what they gave me. Please, they're going to kill you anyway. You know that.
In that case, what's the point in you dying too, Alexander? Give it to me.
That's the first time anybody ever thought of my life before his own. I should have told you when you first came here that they were going to kill you. Because I knew, but I was afraid. I was afraid.
That's all right. It's all right, Alexander. Listen, we haven't given up, and there may be something you can do to help.
Anything I can do to help, you just tell me.
All right. Did the Platonians always have this power?
No, not until we came to this planet.
Alexander, it is possible for you to recall how long after you arrived here that that power began to develop?
How could I forget that? It was exactly six months and fourteen days after we got here that they started pushing me around.
And would you know how many months' supplies you brought with you?
Well, four, I think. Or three.
That's close enough, Alexander. Fascinating. Their power developed two or three months after they started eating the native foods.
That's right.
Then it is logical to assume that there is a connection between the psychokinetic power and the eating of the native foods.
Then why wouldn't Alexander have the same power as the others?
Perhaps his system cannot absorb the crucial element.
Bones, I think it'd be a good idea if you took a reading of Alexander's blood.
Not that I'm afraid or anything, but will it hurt much?
You won't even know it happened.
You still have a tricorder reading of Parmen's blood, don't you?
Of course. Parmen possesses the highest order of psychokinetic ability, and Alexander the lowest, in the same environmental conditions.
The probabilities are that Alexander was born with some biochemical deficiency relative to Platonius.
I'll run both their blood samples through for a full comparative test on the tricorder.
And if our theory works out, we've got a weapon.
The one significant difference between Parmen's blood and Alexander's is a concentration of kironide, broken down by pituitary hormone.
Kironide. It's a high-energy source. That could be it.
The pituitary hormones confirm the hypothesis. They also regulate body growth.
Oh. You mean the same thing that kept me from having the power made me a dwarf?
Yes. It's also obvious why Parmen kept this little utopia secret. Anyone coming down here and remaining long enough would acquire the power.
Exactly. McCoy, there must be a quick way of building up a concentration of kironide in our blood.
It'll take some doing, but it is possible.
What are we waiting for?
What is it, Bones?
Even if the kironide reaches the desired effect, it still may not help us get out of here.
Yes. There are thirty eight of them.
The point is well taken. However, the psychokinetic power is not additive. If it were, considering the Platonians' hostile propensities, two or three of them would have combined forces centuries ago and deposed Parmen.
He's right. Do you know, Parmen says each has his own separate power frequency, because before when they've tried to combine their powers, and use them together, it never worked.
I'm ready.
Let's not any waste time. Give us double the concentration in Parmen's bloodstream.
The time factor concerns me. It may take days or even weeks before there's enough build up from the kironide to be of any benefit to us.
Yes. What about Alexander?
Since the kironide's broken down and injected directly into his bloodstream, it should work on him as well as us. Better in fact, because he's acclimated.
Oh, no. Not after what they've done to me.
Why not? You could conceivably take Parmen's place and run the whole planet.
You think that's what I want? Become one of them? Become my own enemy? Just lie around like a big blob of nothing and have things done for me? I want to move around for myself. If I'm going to laugh or cry, I want do it for myself. You can keep your precious power. All I ask is one thing. If you do make it out of here, take me with you. Just drop me any place they never heard of kironide or Platonius.
Alexander.
Nurse. Lieutenant Uhura.
I guess we weren't sufficiently entertaining.
Are we ever glad to see you.
We were forced in the transporter and beamed down. It was like becoming someone's puppet.
I thought I was sleepwalking. I couldn't stop myself. Captain, what is it? What's going on?
Spock, do you feel any effect of the kironide shot?
I have experienced a slight flush, Captain.
So did l. Let's try a simple test. Concentrate on raising this plate of fruit. Nothing.
Fellow academicians. Twenty five hundred years ago, a band of hearty vagabonds arrived on this barren, rough-hewn planet. There was a desperate hardship of backbreaking toil. And then a divine providence graced our genius and our dedication with the power of powers. And through it, our every need instantly materialised. We thereupon determined to form a utopian brotherhood. This night is indeed a festive occasion, for tonight, we welcome into that brotherhood its first new member.
Not yet, Parmen. You have to convince the doctor first.
They'll never do it, Jim.
Doctor, please. You have destroyed the festive mood of the ladies. We must recapture it at once. I know. What would be better than a serenade from the laughing spaceman?
(singing) Take care, young ladies, and value your wine. Be watchful of young men in their velvet prime.
And now let the revels begin.
Oh, how faithless and fickle.
Make up your minds.
I'm so ashamed. Please make them stop.
We have tried.
Please, please make them stop.
I haven't the power. I'm deeply sorry. We've failed you.
For so long I've wanted to be close to you. Now all I want to crawl away and die.
Careful, Mister Spock. Too much love is dangerous.
Remember, Cupid's arrow kills Vulcans. (general laughter)
(in Kirk's arms) I'm so frightened, Captain. I'm so very frightened.
That's the way they want you to feel. It makes them think that they're alive.
I know it, but I wish I could stop trembling.
Try not to think of them. Try.
I'm thinking. I'm thinking of all the times on the Enterprise when I was scared to death and I would see you so busy at your commands. And I would hear your voice from all the parts of the ship and my fears would fade. And now they are making me tremble. But I'm not afraid. I am not afraid.
Parmen, let's get on with it.
You are so impatient, my wife. Observe the doctor and learn. He's quite content to wait for the piece de resistance.
You're half dead, all of you! You've been dead for centuries. We may disappear tomorrow, but at least we're living now, and you can't stand that, can you? You're half crazy because there's nothing inside. Nothing. And you have to torture us to convince yourselves you're superior.
Stop it, Parmen! Stop it! I'll do whatever you want me to do. I'll stay and serve you, but stop it!
Parmen.
Alexander again. He likes to play with knives. Very well, we shall indulge him.
Who did that?
(throwing down the whip.) I did.
Impossible!
Quite possible and logical.
What is this?
What's going on?
Platonians, listen to me. The next one of you that tries any trick will get hurt. Not only do we have your psychokinetic abilities, but at twice your power level.
Not twice mine!
Captain, no! Captain! I beg of you, I'll do anything you say. I do not wish to die. Captain, do you hear me?
Don't stop me. Let me finish him off.
Do you want to be like him?
Parmen, listen to me. I could have had your power, but I didn't want it. I could have had your place right now, but the sight of you and your Academicians sickens me. Despite your brains, you're the most contemptible things that ever lived in this universe.
Captain, you knew that I intended to destroy both you and the Enterprise, yet you spared me.
To us, killing is murder, even for revenge. But there will be other starships.
There's no need for concern. They'll be safe. Of late, I have begun to think that we've become bizarre and unproductive. We are existing merely to nourish our own power. It's time for some fresh air. We shall welcome your interstellar visits.
I don't believe you.
That would be highly uncharacteristic. We must expect, Parmen, that the moment we leave here, your fear would be gone and you would again be as sadistic and as arrogant as your twenty five hundred years have made you.
Just remember, we can recreate that power in a matter of hours, so don't try anything.
Understood, Captain. And you're right, none of us can be trusted. Uncontrolled, power will turn even saints into savages, and we can all be counted upon to live down to our lowest impulses.
You're very good at making speeches, Parmen. Just make sure that this one sinks in. Now move aside. Alexander. Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott, prepare to beam us up. I have a little surprise for you. I'm bringing a visitor aboard.
Wink Of An Eye
Kirk to Enterprise.
What do your sensors read?
They register something, sir, but I'm blessed if I can figure out what it is.
Specify.
I can't get a fix on it. Sensors don't pinpoint a location. We may have a malfunction. I'm about to check circuits, sir.
You do that. Lieutenant Uhura, does the location of the distress call correspond with this area
Exactly?
Yes, sir. I am still receiving visual contact. I can see them, but I can't see you.
Check co-ordinates. Is it the same area?
Co-ordinates correspond, Captain.
Well, apart from the landing party, there's no one here. There are no Scalosians.
The distress call is very strong, Captain. They are pleading for immediate assistance.
Check circuits for malfunctions. Kirk out.
It must be a malfunction. This is a barren world. There's hardly any vegetation, no apparent animal life.
When we've run analysis, we should have some explanation. (waves away a buzz) But there is an insect life.
My tricorder doesn't register it.
It registers in my ears. Nothing, Mister Spock?
Evidently a civilisation of high order, rating number seven on the industrial scale. Humanoid in appearance, according to the paintings. An abundance of literature, which I shall have translated and processed. Certain structures hold evidence of recent occupancy while others are apparently long abandoned.
No sign of present life?
Instrument readings indicate life-form, but of a highly unusual and intermittent nature. They have no discernible form or location. A most puzzling phenomenon, Captain. I shall have to study it further.
Something was here. We saw them on the screen. Lieutenant Uhura is still getting a distress call. What happened?
Unknown at present, Captain.
Mister Spock, I want you to run a survey, a complete survey of the planet using all ship's available instruments.
Compton!
What happened?
Lieutenant Uhura, start a replay of the distress call. Scotty, are the transporter controls functioning now?
Aye, sir. Is Mister Spock still down there?
No, he's in Sickbay. Doctor McCoy is running a check on the landing party. What is it, Lieutenant?
Malfunction, sir.
Mister Sulu, I would like
Captain. It corrected itself.
Captain, there's some trouble on the hangar deck. The controls are frozen.
Have repair crews been assigned?
Yes, sir.
The tape is ready, sir.
Play it.
To any and all space travellers passing within range of the planet Scalos, I send you an urgent appeal for help. My comrades and I are the last surviving members of what was once a thriving civilisation. Those of us who are left have taken shelter in this area. We have no explanation for what has been happening to us. Our number is now five. We were once a nation of nine hundred thousand.
Freeze it.
It is logical to assume that this distress call was pre-recorded. What we received was evidently a delayed taped message.
That would explain our continuing to receive it while our sensors only picked up the landing party, sir.
The fact remains, when we beamed down there we couldn't find these people. They were there, now they're not. Nor is Crewman Compton.
It would seem that some force or agent only partially discernible to our instruments may have been responsible.
Mister Sulu, I want the ship on standby alert while we continue the investigation.
Sir, now I have readings that deflectors are inoperative. The controls are frozen.
Scotty, assist.
Mister Spock, ever since we beamed up from Scalos, we've had a series of malfunctions. I want an investigation and an explanation.
McCoy to Captain Kirk. Captain's presence for examination is requested.
Can't it wait, Bones?
Your orders, Jim. You're the last one.
What do you read so far?
Can we discuss it here?
On my way. Mister Spock, you have the conn.
What is it?
Tell the captain what you told me.
Something's going on, Captain. Somebody's opened all the medical supply cabinets.
Anything missing?
Just disordered, as though someone had picked up everything and examined it.
Thank you.
Lie down, Jim.
That fits in with other disturbances. Bones, what did your readings show up on the other men?
All perfectly normal. Whatever happened to Compton down there apparently had no effect on anyone else.
Any of them report any unusual experience since beaming?
No. There's no mention of it.
I'm not finished yet.
Hold on. Bones, could something be making me hallucinate?
What do you mean?
I mean that twice before something touched me, and there was nothing there. And it's just happened again. Could I be imagining it?
Physically, there's nothing wrong with you.
But am I hallucinating?
I'd say no.
Then we did beam something aboard. Something has invaded the ship. Kirk to Spock. Come in. Spock, come in.
(bad static) Captain, I have a reading from Life Support centre
Spock, I can't hear you. Check your circuits. Is there a malfunction?
Captain, intercom system is breaking down rapidly.
Lieutenant, ship wide order. Use communicators instead of intercom. Issue phasers to all crew members. Spock, repeat.
I have a reading from Life Support centre. Alien substances being introduced.
Meet me there on the double.
Spock?
It is a force field, Captain, the nature of which I'm not familiar with. I'm getting readings of an alien presence similar to those obtained on the planet's surface, but they seem to have no exact location.
Phasers on stun. Sweep the area.
It would seem, Captain, that they intend to allow only the two of us to enter. I should advise caution.
What is it?
Unknown, Captain. But it is evidently a device of alien origin.
Hooked into the life support. Designed to affect it.
Life support is still operating. I would say that the installation is incomplete.
Disconnect it. (Spock gets a shock from it) Destroy it.
That was no force field. Something shoved me back. They're in here. You! What are you doing on my ship? Show yourselves!
It seems that we may look at it, Captain, but that is all.
A show of strength.
Yes. Evidently they are convinced that we can do nothing to stop them, and they wish to impress upon us what they can do to us.
Have your readings been fed into the computer?
Affirmative.
Read out.
Computer, analyse and reply. Have we been invaded?
Affirmative.
Nature and description of enemy forces.
Data insufficient.
Number of enemy forces.
Data insufficient.
Purpose of the invasion?
Immediate purpose, seizure and control of Federation Star ship Enterprise and crew. Data insufficient for determination of end purpose.
Is there a connection between this and Compton's disappearance?
Data insufficient.
Are we at present capable of resisting?
Negative.
Your recommendation?
If incapable of resistance, negotiate for terms.
We will not negotiate. Do you concur?
Aye.
Mister Spock?
Your recommendations, Captain?
Yeoman, is that coffee available, or have those circuits been damaged as well? (takes a cup from her tray) My recommendation? Make them take the next step.
Spock?
(the woman from the distress call) Captain.
Would you mind explaining (she kisses him) Who are you?
Deela. The enemy.
You're the enemy?
Yes. You beamed me aboard yourself when you came up. A ridiculously long process, but I've taken care of it.
What have you done with my men?
Nothing.
Nothing? Mister Spock? Scotty. This is nothing?
There's really nothing wrong with them. They are just as they have always been. It's you who are different.
Lieutenant. Sulu. This is nothing?
They cannot hear you, Captain. To their ears, you sound like an insect. That's your description, Captain. Accurate, if unflattering. Really, there is nothing wrong with them.
What have you done?
Changed you. So you are like me now. Your crew cannot see you or any of us because of the acceleration. We move in the wink of an eye. Oh, there is a scientific explanation for it, but all that really matters is that you can see me and talk to me, and we can go on from there.
Why?
Because I like you. Didn't you guess? Or are you so accustomed to being kissed by invisible women?
Deela. Is this why you sabotaged my ship?
Oh, but it has not been sabotaged. We we had to make some changes in it to adjust it to us.
You said we?
Yes. Of course. My chief scientist and his crew. I am their queen. You are going to be their king. You'll enjoy living on Scalos.
What about my ship? My crew?
Oh, in a few of their moments, they will realise that you've vanished. They will look for you, but they will not find you. You're accelerated far beyond their power to see. So they'll go on without you. Don't be so stubborn. You cannot go back to them, ever. Is it so dreadful a prospect?
(draws his phaser) This won't kill you, but the stun effect is not very pleasant.
But that won't work. You go ahead and try. Point it right at me.
My reactions are much too fast for such a crude weapon. And I am quite good at self-defense, too. This can be set for stun and destroy, too, like yours. (his phaser goes flying) Please, accept what has happened. There is nothing you can do to change it.
If I agree to go with you, will you set this ship to rights? Take out that device in the life-support system?
Don't be so silly. You'll feel better about it all in a little while. It always happens this way. They are very upset at first, then it wears off and they, they learn to like it. You will, too.
He's on his way to you. Be gentle with him.
Captain. Captain Kirk! He's gone!
Lieutenant, did you see what happened?
Well, he was sitting there. He'd just drunk his coffee and set his cup down. You see it's still there. And then he vanished.
Mister Sulu, do you verify?
That's just what happened. He was there, then all of a sudden he wasn't there.
Captain Kirk, you've made it.
Compton, did they accelerate you?
Yes, sir.
They hooked something into the life support system. They're in there. We've got to get rid of it.
I'm sorry, sir. Entry is forbidden.
By whose order?
The commander, sir. You'll have to step back, please.
I'm your commander, Compton. I order you to let me in.
I'm sorry, sir. You are no longer.
Who is? Deela? Is that who you're working for?
At first I refused, but then after a while I found I couldn't help myself. I met this girl. She's one of them. I've never known anyone like her. She brought me aboard to show them operation of the ship. Bridge controls, life support. She explained that they wanted to know. I didn't understand at first, but I do now. So will you, sir.
All right, Compton.
Stun.
You were ordered to stop him. Why did you disobey?
I tried to stop him. You hurt him.
He was violent. He had to be subdued.
He was my captain.
(to a young woman) Another will be secured for you.
I'm getting a trace reading similar to that on the planet. Mister Sulu, did you drink your coffee?
Yes.
Did anyone else?
I had some.
May I?
Was it the coffee? Are we going to go too, just like the captain?
I cannot give you that answer until these have been analysed.
By that time it'll be too late.
I suggest that we recall the captain's words, Make them take the next step. It would seem they have taken it. And we must determine effective countermeasures. Mister Scott, you have the conn. I shall be in the medical lab.
I hate what happens to them when they're damaged. You're going to have to learn to control your temper, Rael. I do not want that to happen to this one. If they are so stubborn a species, perhaps they will last longer.
It may be.
I hope so. They all go so soon. I want to keep this one a long time. He's pretty.
He is inferior, Deela.
Oh? I don't think so.
You cannot allow yourself to feel an attachment to such.
I can allow myself anything I want. Oh, Rael, don't be like that. Am I jealous of what you do?
I do my duty.
So do I. And sometimes I allow myself to enjoy it.
Hello.
What is that device doing on my ship?
Deela will explain it.
I will tell you anything you want to know, and you'll approve of it.
Approve of it? We're your prisoners.
Hardly. You're free to go anywhere you want to.
Go ahead, Captain. It is not yet completely linked to your support system, but it is in operating order. Study it if you wish. I suggest that you do not touch it.
He told you not to touch it. Look at your hands. They're almost frozen, aren't they? It will pass.
The unit has its own self-defence mechanism, as you see. You should've heeded me.
In your struggle with Compton, some of his cells were damaged. Those newly accelerated to our level are sensitive to cell damage. They age rapidly and die.
He was so young.
Was.
This is what you have planned for us?
We all die, even on Scalos.
Why did you lie to him? He did not damage that one, you did.
Perhaps he will be less violent now.
I see no reason to make him feel any worse than he has to.
Why do you care what he feels?
Rael, he's not one of us. He's temporary. (getting a message via her collar device) He's gone to the medical laboratory. He's trying to communicate with the Vulcan. His species is capable of much affection.
I have noted that.
I wonder if they will demonstrate it to us. Oh, Rael, stop sulking. Accept it. We've had to accept it all our lives. Don't make it worse.
Go back to work.
Kirk to Spock, I have fed all the ascertainable facts into the computer banks.
Go ahead. You won't accomplish anything, but it may be historically valuable.
Hyperacceleration is the key. I have counted only five of them aboard, but they have taken over the ship, and we are under their control due to this acceleration. They are able to speed others up to their level, as they did Compton and me. Presumably, this is enslavement? Those so treated exist at this accelerated level, becoming docile eventually. But when
Damaged.
Damaged, they age incredibly fast, as though accelerated living
Burns them out.
Burns them out. Compton was burned out. The device attached to the life-support system produces an extreme, numbing cold. It is my belief that they are turning the Enterprise into a gigantic deep-freeze for purposes only the Scalosians know.
Quite correct.
The unit has a protective shield which does not allow any physical contact. I don't know how to destroy it, but its destruction is imperative.
The unit will be activated. By the time they hear this, it will be too late. You have remarkable reasoning powers, Captain. You were quite right in almost every assumption.
Why are you doing this?
Do you really want to know? In a little while it won't matter to you at all. You'll be quite happy about it, Just as Compton was.
I really want to know.
Oh, dear. You are so stubborn. It should be obvious to you that we're doing it because we have to. A long time ago, it is in our history, we used to be like you. Then our country was almost destroyed by volcanic eruptions. The water was polluted. Radiation was released. That changed us. It accelerated us. The children died. Most of the women found they could not have more. All of our men had become sterile. So we had to mate outside our own people. Whenever a spaceship came by, we'd send our calls for help. But accelerating them to our level burned them out. Don't you see, Captain? Do I have to go into every detail? We are going to take you down with us. Perhaps one or two others of your crew. We have to. We'll be kind to you. I wouldn't hurt you, certainly. I do like you.
What about the rest of my crew?
They'll remain here in suspended animation. It will do them no harm. We are saving them for when we need them in the future. You will not last forever. You know that, Captain. Captain, we have the right to survive.
Not by killing others.
You were doing exactly the same thing. You came charging into that life-support room the minute you knew there was trouble. You would have killed every one my people if you could have.
You invaded my ship. You threaten my crew.
There is no difference.
There is a difference! Your trouble is in you.
We did not ask for it. We are not to blame. We are handling it the only way we know how. The way our parents and their parents before them.
Did they solve anything? Have you tried any other way? Deela, have your scientists disconnect, destroy that unit. I promise you, we'll use every skill we have to help you. We'll move you to another planet. We'll call on the most brilliant minds in our Federation to help. We'll do it
We have tried other ways. We've tried to make the transition to your level. Some of us, that is. Those who made the attempt died. We are trapped, Captain, Just as you are trapped now. I'm sorry for what's going to happen to you, but I cannot change it. You cannot change me.
Go to the transporter room, Deela. Signal me when you're there and beam down.
With the captain?
Yes. I'll activate our unit and follow you. I'm setting it to allow all of us time to get off the ship. Please don't delay.
Just what makes you think I would do that? The captain's gone.
Go after him, Deela.
There's no question about it, Spock. I want you to take a look at this. The same substance is in the captain's coffee as in the Scalosian water, and there's no trace of it in any other cups.
Why did you run?
I panicked.
I don't believe that.
I'd like to leave before he activates the suspended animation device.
(into her comm. unit) We're in the transporter room. You can activate.
Beam him down at once.
Captain.
What have you done to the transporter, Captain?
It was working before. Try it again.
(into her comm. unit) The transporter isn't working.
What'd he do to it?
Nothing. He didn't have time.
It must be a, what do you call it? A malfunction. You'd better not activate the unit yet. What would you say it is, Captain?
The technicians reported a loss of power. That must be it.
The captain says his technicians
I heard him. You expect me to believe him?
I expect you to check into all possible causes. If I had a suspicious nature, Captain, I would say that you sabotaged the transporter to buy time.
Yes, of course.
I'm glad we're both innocents. I despise devious people, don't you?
I believe in honest relationships myself.
Nurse, programme the information and determine whether we can find counteragents. (there's a buzz) Doctor, did you just
I've been hearing that whine ever since we beamed down to Scalos.
I know what it is. We brought it with us from Scalos. If you'll excuse me, I shall be on the bridge.
Your quarters are quite like you, Captain. Austere and efficient, and in their own way, handsome.
A room should reflect its occupant.
Absolutely. May I freshen up? All this rushing about has left me windblown. I'm glad to see you allow yourself some comforts. Are you married, Captain? No family? No attachments? I know. You're married to your career, and you never look at another woman.
Well, if she's pretty enough, I'll look.
I wondered when you'd say something nice to me. Am I more presentable now?
A bit.
It was quite delightful kissing you when you couldn't see me. But now
But now.
No. I wouldn't allow you to take that no matter how much we trust each other. But I would've been disappointed if you hadn't tried.
Was I too crude?
Just don't try it again. You're far too vulnerable to skin damage. All I have to do is scratch you.
Yes. I know.
The difference between us is that you will come around to our way of thinking sooner or later. But it's better sooner than later.
Lieutenant, will you replay the Scalosian distress call on my viewer?
Aye, sir.
To any and all space travellers passing within range of the planet Scalos, I send you an urgent appeal for help. My comrades and I are the last surviving members of what was once a thriving civilisation.
Compton!
What happened?
I was looking at him. I was looking right at him, and then he just wasn't there
Those of us who are left have taken shelter in this area. We have no explanation for what's happening to us. (Spock slows down the playback, then speeds it up) Those of us who are left have taken shelter in this area. We have no explanation for what's happening to us. Nation of nine hundred thousand. City alone holding one hundred thirteen thousand. On which existed several culturally enlightened Indigenous population
There is an insect life.
My tricorder doesn't register it.
My ears register it.
This is a barren world. Limited vegetation, no apparent animal life.
McCoy to Spock.
Spock here.
I've found a tape in the computer down here, and when I try to read it, all I get is a whine.
Bring it to the bridge at once, Doctor.
This device attached to the life-support system produces an extreme, numbing cold. It is my belief that they are turning the Enterprise into a gigantic deep-freeze. The unit has protective shield which does not allow any physical contact. I don't know how to destroy it, but its destruction is imperative.
The unit will be activated. By the time they hear this, it will be too late.
Lieutenant Uhura, notify the rest of the crew.
Aye, sir.
Can we use phasers to cut through that wall, bypass the force field and get at that unit?
Mister Scott, we cannot cope with them on our level.
Can we find some way of coping with them on theirs?
That is a very logical suggestion. Stand by in the transporter room.
This is the only damage? Go get the others and bring them up here. (into comm.) Deela. Deela? Deela!
Rael!
Rael, stop.
No.
Now, stop it. Did he damage you, Captain?
No.
How very fortunate for you, Rael. Don't you dare do anything like that again. It's contemptible.
Then don't torment me. You know how I feel.
I don't care what your feelings are. I don't want to know that aspect of it. What I do is necessary, and you have no right to question it. Allow me the dignity of liking the man I select. Is the transporter repaired?
No. I have more work to do.
Don't you think you'd better do it?
He loves me. I adored him when I was a child. I suppose I still do. I must say, you behaved better than he did.
Yes, I hope so.
What did you say?
I said I hoped I behaved correctly.
And nothing bothers you now?
Why are we here?
Our leaving was delayed. Don't you remember? You damaged the transporter.
Oh, yes. That was wrong of me.
Yes, it certainly was.
But we are going to Scalos?
Do you want to?
Oh, yes.
What about your crew? Aren't you worried about them?
They'll be all right.
Oh.
What's the matter?
Nothing. You've completely accepted the situation, haven't you? You even like it.
Am I behaving incorrectly?
No! I liked you better before. Stubborn and irritating and independent, like Rael.
Those are undesirable qualities.
Maybe that's why I liked you so much. Because you were like him. (into comm.) Rael? You don't have to worry about the captain. He's made the adjustment.
Finished.
Yes, it counteracts the substance most effectively.
Most effectively under laboratory conditions, but the question is will it work in the human body? And the second question is, how do we get it to the captain?
By drinking the Scalosian water. (and does so)
Spock, you don't know what that'll do to you.
It is somewhat stimulating. You seem to be moving very slowly, Doctor. Fascinating.
He's gone.
Just like Compton.
I've beamed the others down.
Is it repaired already?
Why didn't you tell me?
It would've been an intrusion. Come up when you wish. Signal me when you are ready.
Where will you be?
In life support. I have to activate our unit.
Rael, wait. I'm sorry.
I know.
Well, come, Captain. It's time to leave your pretty ship.
The unit is activated, Deela. Beam down at once.
Your crew will be all right. You said so yourself.
I'm sorry.
(into comm.) He's broken away. He's armed.
You are very clever, Captain. You tricked me. I should've known that you would never adjust. What shall we expect from you now?
We could put you in suspended animation until we determine what to do with you.
Your survival does not depend on that.
No, it doesn't. What do you want us to do with you?
Don't make a game of it, Captain. We've lost.
If I sent you to Scalos, you'd undoubtedly play the same trick on the next spaceship that passed by.
There won't be any others. You'll warn them. Your federation will quarantine the entire area.
Yes, I suppose it would.
And we will die and solve your problem that way. And ours.
Now, what about your problem, Captain, and your Vulcan friend?
If you will devote yourself exclusively to the concerns of Scalos, madam, we shall be pleased to remain and take care of the Enterprise.
You could still find life on Scalos very pleasant.
And very brief.
It'll be just as brief here. You cannot get back to your own level. No answer, Captain? Do I displease you so much?
Oh, no. I can think of nothing I'd rather do than stay with you. Except staying alive.
Energise.
Goodbye, Captain.
Well, Mister Spock, what have you got?
Doctor McCoy and I have synthesised a possible counteragent to the Scalosian water. Regrettably, we did not have the opportunity to test it.
Let's test it. (drinks the contents of a small vial) Nothing's happening.
You do seem to be moving very slowly, Captain.
Mister Spock.
Captain Kirk, where the blazes did you come from?
Out of the nowhere into the here.
And Mister Spock, is he coming too?
Scotty.
Somebody's repairing every console on the ship.
This panel is being recircuited at incredible speed.
I think we've located Mister Spock. Lieutenant, are your circuits clearing?
Yes, sir.
Cancel Red Alert, Mister Sulu.
Aye, sir.
Open all channels. Captain to crew. Repairs are now being effected by Mister Spock. The ship will resume normal operations almost immediately.
Mister Spock, my compliments to your repair work and yourself.
Thank you, Captain. I found it an accelerating experience.
Yes. No malfunctions anywhere? (sees the Scalosians on the viewscreen) Lieutenant.
I'm sorry, sir. I touched the tape button accidentally. I'll take it off.
That's no malfunction.
No, sir.
Goodbye Deela.
The Empath
Dust. Apparently these instruments have not been recently used.
Record tape. Maybe it'll tell us something about the personnel that lived here.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Come in, please.
Kirk here. What is it, Enterprise?
Scott here, sir.
Our instruments have picked up a gigantic solar flare
With very high levels of cosmic rays accompanying it.
How bad?
An enormous one.
Our sensors indicate the cosmic ray concentration measures three point five one on the Ritter scale. That'll play the very devil with the crew, as well as the ship.
At that rate, it will take exactly seventy four point one solar hours for the storm to pass.
Get that ship out of here. Stay at minimum distance for absolute safety.
Aye, aye, sir. We'll beam you up in
Negative. We're staying here. The atmosphere will protect us.
Get that ship out of here, Mister Scott.
Very well, sir. Scott out.
Mister Spock, what about that tape?
Remember, Captain, what we see on this tape happened approximately three months ago.
What happened to them?
Where's does that sound coming from? Spock, can you pinpoint it?
Negative, Captain. It doesn't register.
Bones! Spock!
Spock. Bones. Where are we?
Exactly one two one point three two metres beneath the planet surface, Captain.
How did we get here?
Residual energy readings indicate we were beamed here by a matter-energy scrambler, similar to our own transporter mechanism.
That's a nasty cut, Jim. Does it hurt?
No.
Captain, picking up a life-form reading bearing four two mark seven.
One of the missing scientists?
Negative. Although humanoid, it is definitely not Homo Sapiens.
Identification?
Impossible. I can make no exact identification other than it being humanoid.
Let's find out. Phasers on stun.
Approaching the life-form, Captain.
What is it?
Still undistinguishable.
Be careful.
She seems harmless enough.
The sand-bats of Manark Four appear to be inanimate rock crystals, Doctor, until they attack.
We're not going to hurt you. Is this your home? Do you live here? What about it, Spock? Analysis.
From what we know of the specific gravity and other environmental factors of this planet, a life-form such as hers could not evolve here.
Are you responsible for bringing us here? Don't be afraid. Bones, what's wrong with her?
She's a mute, Jim. No vocal cords, not even vestigals. And I don't think it's a pathological condition.
Explain.
She appears to be perfectly healthy. As for the other, her lack of vocal cords could be physiologically normal for her species, whatever that is.
A race of mutes, like the civilisation on Gamma Vertis Four.
That's my observation, for whatever it's worth.
Without speech, how's she going to be able to understand us? Unless she's a telepath.
An unlikely possibility, Captain, since over ninety eight percent of the known telepathic species send thoughts as well as receive them. She's made no attempt to contact our minds.
We can't keep referring to her as she, as if she weren't here.
Do you have any ideas?
Well, I don't know about you, but I'm going to call her Gem.
Gem, Doctor?
Well, that's better than 'Hey, you.'
I want to know why we're here. I want to know what's going on. And she knows.
I'm Captain
We are aware of your identity, Captain.
Who are you? Why did you bring us here?
We are Vians. Do not interfere.
What do you intend to do with us?
Delay us no longer.
We come (moves forward and gets pushed back by a weapon) Since you already know who we are, you must also know that we come in peace. Our prime directive specifically prohibits us from any interference.)
I can't seem to stand up.
Don't fight the force field. There's something about it that upsets the body metabolism.
Not quite, Doctor. The field draws its energy from your bodies. The more you resist, the stronger the force field becomes. Sufficient.
Mister Spock there must be an exit other than the one we just saw.
Correct, Captain.
Do you feel all right, Jim?
Don't worry about me. They may have hurt her.
Did they hurt you?
The pain is gone. She touched my head, and the pain is gone.
The wound is completely healed. It fits, Jim. She must be an empath. Her nervous system is so sensitive, highly responsive that she can actually feel our emotional and physical reactions. They become part of her.
Thank you.
Captain, in that direction, my tricorder is now picking up a substantial collection of objects.
Details.
Electronically sophisticated devices. I fail to understand why my tricorder previously gave no indication of them being out there.
Well they're there now. Let's go check them out. (to Gem) Staying here alone could be dangerous. Come with us.
Fascinating.
Look at this stuff.
Bones Spock, come here.
Jim, Spock.
We are on schedule. Some further simple tests are necessary.
We've seen the results of some of your tests.
I found our missing men. Dead. Another one of your experiments?
You're wrong. Their own imperfections killed them. They were not fit subjects. Come. Time is short.
Yes. Your time is running out. This sun is about to nova. When it does, it'll destroy you, this planet, and this insane torture chamber.
Let's get out of here.
Readings indicate the passage to the surface lies in this direction.
Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise, come in. Out of range. Readings, Mister Spock?
Research station six kilometres in that direction, Captain.
Let's get there as fast as we can. If the Enterprise has a search party, it'll be there.
Spock! Much further?
Just ahead.
Hey, Jim, look. Scotty and a search party.
Scotty!
Scotty!
Stay there! Come on!
We're coming!
Keep going.
Their will to survive is great.
They love life greatly to struggle so.
The prime ingredient.
Where'd they go?
I believe they were never actually present, Doctor. It was a mirage.
Where's Kirk?
Jim.
What are you doing here? Where's Scotty?
Captain, it was a mirage.
Captain Kirk! We have decided that one specimen will be sufficient. You will come with us.
What about the others?
We've no interest in them. They may go.
Very well.
You can't go back there. You'll end up like the other two.
Captain, I request permission to be allowed
Denied.
But, Captain
You have your orders.
What happened to my men?
They are safe.
One specimen, you said. One specimen! What happened to my men?
Indeed, the prime ingredient.
Where are they? Tell me! You said you'd let them go!
Mister Sulu, will you give us an estimate of how much longer we'll have until those solar flares will subside?
Aye, sir. Readings now indicate two point seven two one on the Ritter scale. At the present rate of decrease, we'll have to wait at least seventeen hours more before we can even attempt to enter orbit.
Aye. Well, as long as we're stuck out here, we might as well relax until the storm passes.
The storm's already lasted four hours longer than we've anticipated. Do you suppose our landing party could be in any danger?
That's not likely. The planet's atmosphere will give them ample protection. And if I know Captain Kirk, he'll be more worried about us than we are about him.
What is it you want to know?
We seek no information as you mean. Your civilisation is yet too immature to have knowledge valuable to us.
You don't need any knowledge from us, yet you're willing to kill for it. Is that what happened to Linke and Ozaba?
We did not kill them. Their own fears killed them.
Well, what did you expect from them? And what do you want from me?
We've already observed the intensity of your passions and gauged your capacity to love others. Now we want you to reveal to us your courage and strength of will.
Why? What is it you hope to prove? If my death is to have any meaning, at least tell me what I'm dying for.
If you live, you will have your answer.
Come on, Spock, the passageway was there before. It's got to be there.
Doctor, I'm unable to lock in on the previous readings. I can find no exit out of here.
Captain! (Kirk wakes) Jim, what is it? What have they done to you?
Help him. Don't be afraid to help him.
Jim. You lie still. I'll check her out right away.
Will she live?
She seems fine now.
Can you explain what happened?
Complete empathy. She must be a totally functional empath. Her nervous system actually connected to yours to counteract the worst of your symptoms and with her strength, she virtually sustained your body's physiological reactions.
She weakened. I could feel it. Is her life in danger?
It's impossible to say yet, but supplying your body with life support did drain her.
Her withdrawal seemed to suggest the fear of death, Doctor. Only your urging her on caused her to continue.
That's true. Fear would naturally be her first reaction. Perhaps she doesn't know our captain well enough yet to offer up her life for him.
Could the strain really have killed her?
Oh yes. However, I'd assume that her instinct for self-preservation would take over to prevent it. How do you feel?
I'm tired.
Can you recall what happened, Captain?
I remember the laboratory, and they wanted to know something. But I, I can't remember.
Take it easy.
What's the matter with me?
You have all the symptoms of the bends. Nitrogen bubbles in your blood caused the pain. Now how would one get the bends down here?
You'll have to ask the Vians. Will I live?
Well, you could use some time in a decompression chamber. But otherwise, I'd say your recovery is about miraculous. I wish I could take the credit for it, but she did the work.
Captain, I noted that a light preceded you at the moment you were returned here from the Vian's laboratory.
Spock, why do you have to get so analytical at a time like
No, he's right. Continue.
I conclude such a light is an energy transfer point linking this device to the power source.
Can you tap into it?
If I can determine the frequency at which this device operates, I might be able to cause it to function for us.
And get us out of here the same way we were brought in.
I would say so.
Then I would say proceed.
You are called Captain. You are responsible for the lives of your crew. Is this correct?
It is.
We find it necessary to have the co-operation of one of your men in our efforts.
We will not co-operate.
When we resume our interrogations, you will decide which of your men we shall use. It is essential. There is an eighty seven percent chance that the doctor will die. And while Commander Spock's life is not in danger, the possibility is ninety three percent that he will suffer brain damage, resulting in permanent insanity.
How's it coming, Spock?
I do not know, Captain. I'm beginning to understand its operating principles, but that is all.
Spock, It won't be long before the Vians come back. You better find out how that thing works and soon.
Take it easy, Bones.
Men weren't intended to live this far underground. It's just not natural.
And space travel is?
Some men spend the majority of their lives in mines beneath the surface.
I'm a doctor, not a coal miner.
I've recorded my principles and theories on the tricorder, Doctor. Should the Vians return, there is sufficient data for you and the captain to complete the adjustments.
I'm not a mechanic. I couldn't get that thing to work no matter how many notes you left.
Possibly not, but you and the captain together will be able to do so.
In any case, Spock, you're the logical one to leave with the captain.
The decision's mine. If there are any decisions to be made, I'll make them. If and when it becomes necessary.
I don't need any
I'm still Chief Medical Officer of the Enterprise. I'll tell you what you need and when you need it. Would you rather have the bends? That's it. Just lie down and relax.
How long will he be asleep, Doctor?
Between the emotional strain and that attack of bends, he's in pretty bad shape.
I'm not criticizing your action, Doctor. On the contrary, I'm quite grateful for it. The captain will be spared the strain of making so difficult a decision. You have simplified the situation considerably.
How?
While the captain is asleep, I am in command. When the Vians return, I shall go with them.
You mean, if I hadn't given him that shot
Precisely. The choice would have been the captain's. Now it is mine.
Your action is highly unethical. My decision stands.
Not this time, Spock.
The choice has been made. (to Gem) You stay here with my friends. They'll take care of you. Do you understand?
Come, then.
Doctor, please understand that if there was any other way to accomplish our purpose
Get on with it.
Why did you let him do it?
I was convinced in the same way you were, Captain. By the good doctor's hypo.
Anything?
Hmm. A most unusual device. It is a control unit, but not a control mechanism. In fact, it is not a mechanical device.
What exactly is it?
This control is attuned to one electrical pattern of energy, the pattern produced by the mental impulses of the person who possesses it. It is activated solely by mental commands.
Can you adapt it, re-attune it to fit our brain pattern?
I shall attempt to do so. However, it is not possible to adjust the control to fit more than one pattern at a time. I am, of course, most familiar with my own pattern. Therefore, with your permission, I
Do whatever you have to to make it work, Spock. What disturbs me is why the Vians let us keep it.
Fascinating. They must have known we were capable of comprehending this control and making use of it.
And that we would use it to escape.
The only logical assumption is that they wish to let us go.
And they keep McCoy.
That is evidently their intention, Captain.
(to Gem) Somehow, you're the crux, the focal point of all this. Even before we got here, she was a prisoner. They didn't hurt her, they didn't even threaten her.
Indeed, the facts would indicate that she's essential to their purpose.
Yes, there is a purpose, but what is it? Has all the pain and terror happened, or been made to happen for you?
Completed, Captain. The adjustments are delicate. They may not survive more than even one use. However, there should be sufficient energy to transfer us to the Enterprise.
Will it take us to McCoy?
If you so desire.
The best defence is a strong offense, and I intend to start offending right now. Aim for the lab.
Bones. Spock. Get him down. His wrists. (they lie him on a couch) His pulse is almost gone. How is he?
Severe heart damage. Signs of congestion in both lungs. Evidence of massive circulatory collapse.
I
Don't talk. Don't speak. Take it easy until we get you back to the ship. What is it? What's the matter?
He's dying, Jim. We can make him comfortable, but that is all.
You don't know. You're not a doctor.
Internal injuries. Bleeding in the chest and abdomen. Haemorrhage of the spleen and liver. Seventy percent kidney failure.
He's right, Jim. Being a doctor has its drawbacks. I always wondered why I (coughs, so they turn him on his side) Thanks.
How long?
It could happen anytime.
The correct medical phrase, ay, Spock? You've got a a good bedside manner, Spock.
Can't we do something?
I'm afraid not.
Gem might be able to help him, the way she helped me, but could his nearness to death also kill her?
Uncertain, Captain. Dr. McCoy's analysis of her reaction assumes that her instinct for self-preservation would prevent it. However, we cannot be positive.
If she could just strengthen him and keep him from sinking further into death, we might be able to save him.
No interference will be permitted.
She can save his life. Let us help her to go to him.
She must not be urged or forced to take action.
All must proceed without interference.
The purpose that brought us together
What purpose can all this serve, except the fulfilment of some need of yours?
We have but one need left in life, and that is to see the completion of the final moment of our test.
Be patient.
Patient? Our friend is dying.
Perhaps.
What purpose can be served by the death of our friend, except to bring you pleasure? Surely beings as advanced as yourselves know that your star system will soon be extinct. Your sun will nova.
We know.
Then you also know that the millions of inhabitants on its planets are doomed.
That is why we are here.
This arena of death that you have devised for your pleasure. Will it prevent this catastrophe?
No, it will not, but it may save Gem's planet. Of all the planets of Minara, we have the power to transport the inhabitants of only one to safety.
If Gem's planet is the one that will be saved, we must make certain beyond any doubt whatsoever they are worthy of survival.
How will the death of our friend serve this purpose?
His death will not serve it, but her willingness to give her life for him will. You were her teachers.
We were? What could she learn from us?
Your will to survive. Your love of life. Your passion to know. They are recorded in her being.
Her planet will be fortunate.
Each of you is willing to give his life for the others. We must now find out whether that instinct has been transmitted to Gem.
Time grows short.
You were correct, Captain. Everything that has occurred here has been caused to happen by them. This has all been a great laboratory, and we have been the subjects of the test.
No. We only created the circumstances. That was necessary.
Your actions were spontaneous. Everything that is truest and best in all species of beings has been revealed by you. Those are the qualities that make a civilisation worthy to survive.
Behold. That is most significant. An instinct new to the essence of her being is generating.
Compassion for another is becoming part of her functioning life system.
She is afraid.
She's saving herself. She does not yet have the instinct to save her people.
We have failed?
No. No, not yet.
Captain, Dr. McCoy's life is not solely dependent on Gem. The Vians too must be capable of saving his life.
True.
Then you cannot let him die.
His death is not important. We must wait to see whether her instinct for self-sacrifice has become stronger than her instinct for self-preservation.
Don't touch me. Stay away. Jim. Spock. Are you here?
Yes, Bones.
Don't let her touch me. She'll die. Jim, I can't destroy life, even if it's to save my own. I can't. You know that. I can't let you do it.
Captain?
What is it?
The intensity of emotion is draining us and building up the force field.
Yes, I know.
It draws its energy from us, Captain. In spite of what we see, all emotion must be suppressed. That might weaken the field.
I'll try.
Yes.
You cannot use our powers to change what is happening.
You must save the life of our friend.
No. We will not. Her instinct must be developed to the fullest. The test must be complete.
It is complete. Gem has earned the right of survival for her planet. She offered her life.
To offer is not proof enough.
If death is all you understand, here are four lives for you.
We will not leave our friend. You've lost the capacity to feel the emotions you brought Gem here to experience. You don't understand what it is to live. Love and compassion are dead in you. You're nothing but intellect.
Farewell.
Strange.
What is puzzling you, Captain?
I'm not puzzled, Mister Spock. I am awed.
I'm with you, Captain. She awed me.
No, no. I wasn't thinking of Gem. I was thinking of that fantastic element of chance that out in limitless space we should come together with Gem.
Captain, the element of chance can virtually be eliminated by a civilisation as advanced as the Vians.
Not to dispute your computer, Mister Spock, but from little what you've told me, I would say she was a pearl of great price.
What, Scott?
Do you not know the story of the merchant? The merchant, who when he found one pearl of great price, went and sold all that he had and bought it.
Yes, she was all that. And whether the Vians bought her or found her makes little difference. She was of great value.
Well, personally, I find it fascinating that with all their scientific knowledge and advances, that it was good old-fashioned human emotion that they valued the most.
Perhaps the Vulcans should hear about this.
Mister Spock, can you be prevailed upon to bring them the news?
Possibly, Captain. I shall certainly give the thought all the consideration it is due.
Mister Sulu, ahead warp factor two.
Aye, aye, sir. Warp factor two.
Elaan of Troyius
Some desk-bound Starfleet bureaucrat cut these cloak-and-dagger orders.
Aye, but why the secrecy? This star system's under Federation control.
It's in a border area, Mister Scott. The Klingons also claim jurisdiction.
From what I've seen, it's not worth fighting about. Why are we here, Captain?
My orders are to co-operate with Ambassador Petri in all matters pertaining to his mission here.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Scotty. (Scott presses the intercom button) Kirk here. What is it?
Captain, I have a signal from the Elasians. They're ready to beam aboard, and they demand an explanation for the delay.
Demand? What delay? All right. Beam them aboard.
Sounds typical of the Elasians. The scientists who made the initial investigation reported the men were vicious and arrogant.
That's just the negative part, Mister Spock. I've been over those records. Now the women, they're supposed to be something very special. They're supposed to have a kind of subtle, mystical power that drives men wild.
Ambassador Petri, would you drop all this nonsense and tell me what this is about?
That must wait until the Dohlman is aboard.
Dohlman? What the devil is a Dohlman?
The thing most feared and hated by my people. Our most deadly enemy.
Welcome. I am Petri, Ambassador of Troyius.
I'm Captain Kirk. This ship is under my command.
There's a Troyian here. I must know that all is secure before the Dohlman is brought on board.
This ship is secure and we're prepared for any hostile acts. Energise.
Do honour to the Dohlman of Elas.
Glory to Elaan, Dohlman of Elas.
You may stand.
Body armour, nuclear weapons.
Not without precedent, Captain. Remember that
Permission to speak was not given.
You rule this ship?
I am the first officer. This is Captain James Kirk.
Your Glory, I am Petri. In the name of my people
Your mission is known to us. Captain Kirk, you have now permission to show us to our quarters.
Well, now, just a moment. There's going to have to be some kind of understanding.
Please.
My first officer Mister Spock will show you to your quarters. Ambassador, I'd like to speak to you.
You have not been dismissed.
May I have your permission to go?
You are now dismissed.
Why, thank you. Ambassador.
Ambassador, I think it's time you told me what's going on.
That creature, Elaan, is to be the wife of our ruler to bring peace. Our two warring planets now possess the capability of mutual destruction. Some method of co-existence must be found.
I see. So, we go back to Troyius.
Yes. But slowly, Captain. I will need time. Before we reach there, she must be taught civilised manners. In her present condition, my people would never accept her.
And you are to be her teacher?
Those are my orders. I must ask you and your crew to respect, or at least tolerate, their arrogance. Friction must be kept at a minimum.
Yes, that I can understand.
Another thing you should understand, Captain. You have as much at stake as I have. Your superiors made the statement that failure of this mission would be as catastrophic for Federation planning as it would be for our two planets. To gain peace at the price of accepting such a queen is no victory. I will take her the official gifts I bear. Perhaps that will soften her mood.
Mister Chekov, lay in a course for Troyius. Mister Sulu, impulse drive, speed factor point zero three seven.
Impulse drive, Captain?
Yes, that's correct, Mister Sulu. Sublight factor point zero three seven.
Aye, aye, sir.
Captain? You'll not be using the warp drive? All the way on impulse? That'll take a great deal of time.
You in a hurry, Mister Scott?
No.
Captain, the Dohlman is dissatisfied with the quarters provided.
What's the matter with them, Mister Spock?
I do not know, but all the Elasians seem most irrational.
I gave up my quarters because I
Yes, I appreciate your sacrifice, Lieutenant Uhura. I'll talk to her myself.
Swine! Take back your gifts!
Your Glory, these are your wedding slippers.
Your ruler cannot buy the favours of the Dohlman of Elas.
This, (a sky blue thing) this is your wedding dress, a gift from the bridegroom's mother.
I want nothing of his!
This, This is the most prized of royal jewels for your lovely neck.
I would strangle if I was to put the gift of a Troyian dog around my neck. Kryton, by whose permission did he enter?
He came in answer to your summons.
I understand you're not happy with your quarters.
Quarters! (throws something that breaks)
Yes, not happy at all.
Am I a soft Troyian fawn to need pillows to sit on? And these ridiculous female trappings. They are an offense to my eyes.
My communications officer generously vacated the rooms hoping you would find it satisfactory.
I do not find them so, and I find him even less satisfactory. Must my bitterness be compounded with that ridiculous ambassador aboard your ship?
I explained to Her Glory that her council of nobles and the Troyius Tribunal jointly agreed that I should instruct (pause) make her acquainted with the customs and manners of our people.
Kryton! Remove him! And take that garbage with you?
He dares to suggest that I adopt the servile manners of his people!
Your Glory doesn't seem to be responding to instruction.
I will never forgive the council for putting me through this torture. Were you responding to my demand for better quarters?
There are none better. I suggest you make do with these.
You suggest?
There are no more available, but if that's the only way you can get gratification, I'll arrange to have the whole room filled from floor to ceiling with breakable objects.
I will not be humiliated!
Then act in a civilised fashion.
I did not give you permission to leave!
I didn't ask for any.
Captain, I wish to contact my government. I cannot fulfil my mission. It would be an insult to our ruler to bring this incorrigible monster as a bride!
Ambassador! This is supposed to be a peaceful mission.
There cannot be peace between us. We have deluded ourselves. Captain, when I am near them, I do not want peace. I want to kill them.
You're as bad as she is. It's not required that you like each other. Just do your job.
Job? The job is impossible. We cannot make peace with people we detest.
Stop trying to kill each other. Then worry about being friendly.
But if she won't listen to me
Then make her listen, Ambassador. Use a different approach. Stop being so diplomatic. She respects strength. Go in strong.
At first it appeared to be a sensor ghost, but I've run checks on all the instrumentation. All the equipment is functioning perfectly.
Hydrogen cloud reflection?
None in this area. Nothing that would account for it. The ghost appears intermittently.
Speculation?
None, Captain. Insufficient data.
It's not an instrument malfunction. It's not a reflection from a natural phenomenon. A spaceship?
Engineering to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Captain, I know what you said about showing respect, but must I have these persons fool around with my equipment?
Hang on, Scotty. Be pleasant no matter how much it hurts. I'll be right down.
We're only running on impulse engines now. Ordinarily, we use the warp engines exclusively.
Well, I suppose, lassie, that even our impulse engines must seem fast compared to your nuclear propulsion units.
We are interested in how the ship is used in combat, not in what drives it. Engines are for mechanics and menials.
Menials? Without engines, there'd be no fighting or
Mister Scott! I wish you had told me you wanted a tour of the engineering department.
Do we not have the freedom of this ship? We have granted your crew the permission not to kneel in our presence. What else do you want?
Courtesy. Remember?
Courtesy is not for inferiors.
Courtesy is for everyone around here, and you'll find you won't be able to exist on Troyius without it. Mister Scott, our Chief Engineer, has shown you his engineering department. That's a courtesy. You respond by saying thank you.
Bridge to Captain.
Kirk here.
That sensor ghost is moving closer.
On my way.
Lost contact now.
Captain, we had a momentary fix on the object enough to establish it was a spaceship.
Whose?
No data yet.
Captain! Distant bearing, sir, mark seven three point five.
Main screen. Extreme magnification.
Our ghost has materialised.
A Klingon warship. (after a few moments) Any change, Mister Spock?
Negative, Captain. The Klingon ship has simply moved into contact range. She is pacing us, precisely matching our sublight speed and on a parallel course.
Security to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here. What is it?
Disturbance in the Dohlman's quarters, sir.
On my way.
Captain, it's Ambassador Petri. They refuse to explain what's happening, but
Her Glory has not summoned you.
Kryton, remove that Troyian pig.
It was a deep wound, Jim. He lost a lot of blood, but he'll recover.
If I recover, it will be no thanks to you, Captain.
I said talk with her, not fight with her.
I should've known better than to talk to her unarmed, but you forced me. I hold you responsible for this.
Well, I've heard of reluctant brides, but this is ridiculous.
Captain Kirk. May I speak with you, sir?
Yes. Certainly.
A message just came from Starfleet Command. It was class-A security and scrambled. I put it through the decoder.
What was it?
The Federation High Commissioner is on his way to Troyius to attend the royal wedding.
Ambassador, if Elasian women are that vicious, why are men so overwhelmingly attracted to them? I mean, what magic do they possess?
It's not magic. It's biochemical. A man whose flesh is once touched by the tears of a woman of Elas has his heart enslaved forever.
Ambassador, there's an added complication. The Federation High Commissioner will be attending the wedding.
The fat will be in the fire when he learns the bride just tried to murder the groom's ambassador.
There will be no wedding. I would not have our ruler marry that monster if the entire galaxy depended on it, and I will have nothing further to do with you.
I'm not asking you to have anything to do with me. Do your job with her. How long before he's on his feet?
It'll be a few days. A week, at least, Jim.
Here you put me, Captain. Here I will stay. I have nothing further to say to you.
So, Ambassador Petri is going to recover? That is too bad. You have delivered your message. Now you may go.
Nothing would please me more, Your Glory. But your impetuous nature
Your Troyian pig was here in my quarters without any permission, so I stabbed him. Just to be Troyian is enough.
You Elasians pride yourselves on being a warrior people. You must understand discipline to be able to give and take orders. My orders are to take you to Troyius to be married and to see that you learn Troyian customs.
I despise Troyians. Any contact with them makes me feel soiled.
It's been my experience that the prejudices people feel about each other disappear when they get to know each other.
It's not in my experience.
Well, we're still faced with the same problem.
Problem?
Yes, the problem of your indoctrination to Troyian customs and manners.
I have eliminated that problem.
You have eliminated the teacher. The problem still remains.
Oh. And how do we solve the problem?
By giving you a new teacher.
Tell me, what can you teach me?
Table manners, for one thing. This is a plate. It contains food. This is a knife. It cuts the food. This is a glass.
Leave me!
Like it or not, you're going to learn what you've been ordered to learn.
You will return me to Elas immediately.
That's impossible.
Everything I order is possible.
That's the first problem we're going to work on. Then we'll get you ready to go to Troyius.
I will not go to Troyius, I will not be mated to a Troyian, and I will not be humiliated, and I will not be given to a green pig as a bribe to stop a war!
You enjoy the privileges and prerogatives of being a Dohlman. Then be worthy of them. If you don't want the obligations that go along with the title, then give it up.
Nobody speaks to me that way.
That's another one of your problems. Nobody's told you that you're an uncivilized savage, a vicious child in a woman's body, an arrogant monster!
That's no way to treat someone who's telling you the truth.
Tomorrow's lesson will be on courtesy.
Lieutenant, open up the hailing frequency, identify us, and ask the Klingon his intentions.
Aye, sir.
Captain, no response from the Klingon vessel on any channel.
I see. All right, Lieutenant. Monitor all frequencies. Phaser crews stand by. Maintain Yellow Alert.
No one may enter the Dohlman's presence.
Where's Kryton?
On business. No one may enter the Dohlman's presence.
Will you tell Her Glory that Captain Kirk requests the honour of a visit.
The Dohlman has promised I'll be whipped to death if I let Captain Kirk pass through that door.
Thank you, Mister Spock. When they wake up, take them to Security holding.
Captain, your analysis of the situation was flawless, anticipating that she would deny you admittance. However, the logic by which you arrived at your conclusion escapes me.
Mister Spock, the women on your planet are logical. That's the only planet in this galaxy that can make that claim.
You dare touch a member of the royal family.
Only in self-defence. Now, are you going to behave or not?
The penalty is death for what you are doing.
We're not on Elas. We're on my starship. I command here.
You are warned, Captain, never to touch me again.
If I touch you again, Your Glory, it'll be to administer an ancient Earth custom called a spanking, a form of punishment administered to spoiled brats.
You have my leave to go.
You forget, Your Glory, we haven't started your lesson in courtesy.
You can teach me nothing, Captain. If I have to stay here for ten light years, I will not be soiled by any contact with you.
Very well. I'll send in Mister Spock or Doctor McCoy. Either way, you're going to be properly prepared for Troyius. As ordered by councils, rulers, and bureaucrats.
Captain, there is one thing you can teach me.
No, no, you were right the first time. There's nothing I can teach you. There's nothing you do not know.
I don't know how to make people like me. I don't want everybody to hate me.
Well, it's not it's not that people hate you. It's just that people don't like to be treated as though they don't exist.
It's, er, gotten very, er. Something must've gone wrong with the ventilation system.
Captain?
Pardon me, Your Glory. There will be a short recess.
Captain.
Captain, that ancient Earth custom called spanking, what is it?
It's, er, It's, er. We'll talk about it later.
Bridge to Captain Kirk. Mister Spock, I'm getting
I have it on my sensor, Lieutenant.
Bridge to Captain Kirk. Come in, please. Captain Kirk, please answer.
Kirk here.
Oh, Captain, I'm picking up a transmission from inside the Enterprise. It's on a tight beam aimed at the Klingon vessel.
Inside the Enterprise? Can you pinpoint it?
Spock here, Captain. I am triangulating now. It's coming from the engineering section.
Security to Engineering. Intruder alert. Security alert to all decks. Kirk out.
Nobody saw him, but that devil sneaked back in here some way. Watson must've caught him and he was killed for it. He had this. Looks like some sort of transmitter.
It's Klingon. Bones?
Neck snapped clean.
What kind of signal did you send the Klingon ship?
Captain, you must know I will tell you nothing. Our interrogation techniques are more excruciating than you are even capable of.
Yes, I'm aware you're trained to resist any form of physical torture. Kirk to Spock.
Spock here, Captain.
Mister Spock, it was Kryton transmitting. He refuses to talk. I'll need you for the Vulcan mind meld.
Captain, I'm sorry. He seemed
What was he trying to cover that was so important he felt he had to die for it? Scotty, he didn't come into Engineering just to use the transmitter. I want you to check every relay you've got.
Captain, you must realise the time
Don't waste the time telling me about it. Get to it.
Aye.
Kryton was of a noble family. He loved me and wanted to marry me. He was furious when he heard of the announcement of the wedding plans.
He sold out to the Klingons because of jealousy?
Probably. But why speak of unimportant matters when we can speak about us?
There's a Klingon warship out there. What's their involvement? Surely all of this isn't because they want to stop a marriage.
We should welcome their help.
Elaan. Elaan, two planets, an entire star system's stability depends on it. We have a duty to forget what happened.
Could you do that? Could you give me to another man?
My orders and yours say that you belong to another man. What happened, what happened was an accident.
It was no accident. I chose you, and you chose me. I have a plan. With this ship, you could completely obliterate Troyius. Then there will be no need for the marriage. And in gratitude, my people will give you the complete rule of this system.
What kind of a mind could think of such a thing?
He's a Troyian.
Captain?
You cannot resist my love, my love.
Captain.
May we see you a moment?
Jim. Jim! May we please have a word with you?
Captain, are you all right?
Did she cry, Jim?
What?
Did she cry? Did her tears touch you at any time?
Oh, we're in trouble. Now listen, Jim. Petri told Christine that the Elasian women have a sort of a biochemical substance in their tears that acts like a super love potion. And according to him, it doesn't wear off.
It is true then, Captain?
It's true. Bones, you've got to find me an antidote.
I'll try, but I'll need tests and
Bridge to Captain.
Captain here.
Captain, the Klingon ship has changed course. It is heading toward us at warp speed.
I'm on my way. Battle stations.
Phasers stand by.
Phasers ready, sir.
Their speed is better than warp six, Captain.
Mister Chekov, lay in a course to take us out of this star system. If they want to fight, Let's get some manoeuvering room.
Course computed, sir.
Laid in, Captain.
All right. Ahead warp factor two.
Captain, the matter-antimatter
Belay that order. What is it, Scotty?
The anti-matter pods are rigged to blow up the moment we go into warp drive.
Scotty, that bomb he planted. Can you dismantle it?
Not without being blown halfway across the galaxy.
Give us every ounce of power you can from the impulse drive, and find a solution to the bomb. Kirk out. Mister Sulu, stand by to make your manoeuvres smartly. She'll be sluggish on response.
Aye, sir. One hundred thousand kilometres. Ninety. Eighty.
Phaser crews, stand by to fire on command.
Sixty.
Ready.
Fifty.
Hold your fire.
She's passed us without firing a shot.
I don't think they meant to attack us. We were very fortunate this time.
Yes, their tactics are quite clear now, Mister Spock. They were trying to make us cut in warp drive. That way we'd have blown ourselves up and solved their problem for them without risking war with the Federation. Very neat.
Very. But why do the Klingons consider the possession of this system so vital?
Yes, a very good question, Mister Spock.
I have another question, Captain. Is not the bridge the wrong place for the Dohlman at a time like this?
I'll be the judge. Yes, you're quite right. Thank you, Mister Spock. (to Elaan) I want you to go to Sickbay. It's the best protected part of the ship.
I want to be by your side.
Your presence here is interfering with my efficiency, my ability to protect you. Mister Spock, you have the conn.
Deck five.
I love you. I have chosen you, and still I don't understand why you didn't fight the Klingon.
If I can accomplish my mission by turning tail and running, I'll gladly do that.
And that mission is to take me to Troyius.
Yes.
Would you have me wearing my wedding dress for another man and never see you again?
Yes, Elaan.
Are you happy at the prospect?
No.
Scott to Captain.
Kirk here.
I've got bad news, Captain. The entire dilithium crystal converter assembly is fused. No chance of repair.
It's completely unusable.
No chance of restoring warp drive?
Not without dilithium crystals. We can't even generate enough power to fire our weapons.
Kirk out. Elaan, I have to go back to the Bridge. Please, you must go to Sickbay.
Yes, my love.
Test number twenty four. Colladium trioxide in algobarium solution.
Results also negative.
Doctor, there is no antidote to the poison of Elasian tears. The men of Elas have tried desperately for centuries to dispel its power. You're wasting your time, Doctor.
It is my time to waste, Ambassador.
Doctor? The Captain asked me to come here for safety.
Safety? What is your estimate of our chances for survival, Doctor?
That is the captain's responsibility, Ambassador.
Captain, message from the Klingon ship. They're ordering us to stand by for boarding or be destroyed.
They demand an immediate reply.
They're trying to force a fight. Scotty, what's our energy status?
Ninety three percent of impulse power, sir.
We can still manoeuvre.
Manoeuvre? Aye. We can wallow like a garbage scow against a warp-driven starship.
Our shields will hold for a few passes, but without the matter-antimatter reactor, we've no chance. Captain, can you not call Starfleet on this emergency?
And let the Klingons know they succeeded in wiping out our warp engines?
Help could not arrive before the Enterprise would be destroyed.
Now that we are all about to die, I ask you once again to accept this necklace, and to wear it as a token of respect for the desperate wishes of your people and mine for peace.
That's all you men of other worlds can speak of, duty and responsibility.
We'll stall for time, proceed on course and hope the Klingons can be bluffed. Or that they're not prepared for a general war. Open a hailing frequency.
Frequency open, sir.
This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise on Federation business. Our mission is peaceful, but we're not prepared to accept any interference.
Enterprise, prepare to be boarded or destroyed.
I'd say our strategy wasn't totally effective.
Captain, the Klingon ship is closing on an intercept course. Five hundred thousand kilometres. Deflector shields up.
Scotty, can you give me partial power on the phaser banks?
No, sir, not a chance.
Three hundred thousand kilometres.
I told you to stay in Sickbay.
I want to die with you.
We're not going to die. Now get off the bridge.
One hundred thousand kilometres.
He's passed us. All shields held.
Mister Sulu, bring her to one four three mark two. Keep our forward shields to him.
Here he comes again, sir.
Stay with the controls. Keep our forward shields to him.
Better than warp seven.
Hard over, Sulu. Bring her around. He's going for our flank. (another disruptor hit) Sulu!
Sorry, Captain. She won't respond fast enough on impulse.
He's past us again. Damage to number four shield.
How bad?
It will not withstand another full charge, Captain. I'm getting some very peculiar energy readings.
He's paralleling us again. He seems to have broken off the attack.
What sort of readings, Mister Spock?
She is the source.
Elaan?
The necklace.
What kind of jewels are in this?
They call them radans. The necklace is supposed to bring you luck. It is of little value. They are common stones.
These are common stones? (scans them) See, Captain? Here and here.
Common stones? Now I see why the Klingons are interested in this system. May I have this?
If I can be of any help, of course.
You may have just saved our lives. Mister Spock, do you think Scotty could make use of dilithium crystals?
No doubt, Captain.
He's coming in again, sir.
Mister Sulu, prepare on my order to turn quickly to port. Try and protect the number four shield.
Aye, sir.
Now, Sulu. hard a-port!
Shields holding, but weakened, sir.
Captain. Message coming in.
Enterprise, our readings confirm your power extremely low, your shields buckling. This is your last chance to surrender.
Captain, number four shield just collapsed. Impulse power down to thirty one percent.
Lieutenant Uhura, open a hailing frequency.
Channel open, sir.
This is Captain James Kirk of the United Spaceship Enterprise. May I request your terms for surrender?
No terms. Surrender must be unconditional and immediate.
Scotty, your estimate.
We're fitting it now, sir, but we'll have to run a few tests to make sure.
Test it in combat.
Captain, these are crude crystals. There is no way to judge what the unusual shapes will do to the energy flow.
Aye, that could blow us up just as effectively as
Let me know when it's in place. Open a hailing frequency.
Hailing frequency open, sir.
This is the Enterprise. Will you guarantee the safety of our passenger, the Dohlman from Elas?
No conditions. Surrender immediately.
Captain, he's starting his run.
Scott to Captain.
It's in place, sir, but I can't answer for what happens.
You and Spock get up here. Sulu, prepare for warp manoeuvres.
Aye, sir.
Chekov, arm photon torpedoes.
Photon torpedoes ready.
Warp power to the shields, Captain?
Negative. His sensors will pick up our power increase. The more helpless he thinks we are, the closer he'll come. As he passes, I want to cut in warp drive. We'll pivot at warp two and bring all tubes to bear.
Aye, sir.
Mister Chekov, give him a full spread of photon torpedoes.
Aye, Captain.
One hundred thousand kilometres.
Scotty, stand by to cut in warp drive.
Fluctuation. It's the shape of the crystals. I was afraid of that.
Seventy five. Seventy. Sixty. Fifty.
Fire at minimum range.
Forty.
She won't steady down.
Thirty.
Warp in, Scotty. Full power to shields.
Warp factor two. Bring us to course one four eight mark three.
Chekov, photon torpedoes. Fire!
Aye, sir.
Direct hit amidships by photon torpedo.
Damage to Klingon number three shield. Number four shield obliterated. Loss of manoeuvre power.
He's badly damaged, Captain. Continuing away at reduced speed.
Secure from general quarters. Well done, Mister Sulu. Scotty.
But I don't understand you. You mean you won't pursue and finish him off?
No. Mister Sulu, resume course for Troyius.
Aye, aye, sir.
You will not beam down for the ceremony?
No.
I want you to have this as a personal memento. I have learned that on Troyius, they do not wear such things. Remember me.
I have no choice.
Nor have I. I have only responsibilities and obligations. Goodbye.
Goodbye. Energise.
(to Spock) It's stabilised now.
Spock, I've isolated the biochemical substance of the Elasian tears. It's a kind of an infection, and I think I've found an antidote.
You are too late, Doctor. The Captain has found his own antidote.
Are you out of your Vulcan mind? Do you know how long I've worked on
The antidote to a woman of Elas, Doctor, is a starship. The Enterprise infected the Captain long before the Dohlman did.
Mister Sulu, prepare to take us out of orbit.
Well, I doubt seriously if there's any kind of an antidote for the Enterprise.
In this particular instance, Doctor, I agree with you.
Ahead warp factor two.
Whom Gods Destroy
Donald, good to see you.
Governor.
Gentlemen, you don't know what a treat this is for me. It's been too long since I've had company. The force field's back in place now. That means you two are trapped here, and I'm not accepting any excuses for your not dining with me.
We'd be delighted.
Governor, you indicated one additional inmate since our last visit, making a total of fifteen. Is that correct?
It is. The rehabilitation programme isn't progressing too well, and I have my doubts about the effectiveness of this medicine too.
Why, Donald, are you becoming a pessimist?
I'm afraid I have.
A total of fifteen incurably insane out of billions is not what I would call an excessive figure. Who is the new inmate?
Garth. Garth of Izar, a former Starship fleet Captain.
When I was a cadet at the Academy, his exploits were required reading. He was one of my heroes. I'd like to see him.
Of course.
(an Orion woman) Captain! You're making a mistake.
Captain Kirk is pressed for time at the moment, Marta.
There's nothing the matter with me! Can't you see just by looking at me? Can't you tell just by listening?
She sounds rational enough, Captain.
I am rational.
What is it you want to tell me?
I can't tell you in front of him.
You're afraid to talk in front of Governor Cory?
He isn't really Governor Cory at all, that's just it.
She's been saying that for days now. Our medical staff can't figure out why.
Here's Garth. He's been unusually disturbed, and we've had to impose additional restraint.
Cory?
(in cell) Yes, Jim, I'm Cory. It's true. He tricked you.
You said you wanted to see me, Captain. Well, here I am.
Your Vulcan friend is still alive, Captain. My phaser was set to stun, not to kill. He'll be quite comfortable. Almost as comfortable as you and our esteemed governor.
Garth, do you have to make him suffer like that?
You will address me by my proper title, Kirk.
I'm sorry. I should've said Captain Garth.
I am Lord Garth, formerly of Izar, and I lead the future masters of the universe.
I'm sorry, Lord Garth.
You Earth people are a stiff necked lot, aren't you?
Release him.
I'm afraid that subjugating you won't be enough. You must be confined. And all the people of the galaxy who will not bow to my will must be confined or destroyed.
Captain Garth, listen to me.
Oh ho! Our beloved governor has decided to address us, and we have not given him our permission to speak.
Are you so afraid of him that you must keep him pinned?
(releasing Cory) I'm afraid of no one. You're all powerless against me.
Thank you. Now what have you done with the medicine?
The medicine? You mean the poison. I destroyed it.
Destroyed it? It was your only hope.
Silence! The chatter of inferior weaklings wearies me, and it's time I took command of the Enterprise. You'll help me, of course.
Of course.
My crew mutinied. The first use I will make of the Enterprise is to hunt them down and punish them for that.
The crew of the Enterprise will also mutiny.
But they won't. You see, Captain, there's a helpful technique I've mastered.
Good bye, darling. I'll miss you.
Governor Cory, how do you feel?
All right. There is no help for any of us if that madman is in command of the Enterprise. He boasts that he's created the most powerful explosive in the universe, and I believe him.
How does he manage to change form at will?
The people of Antos taught him the techniques of cellular metamorphosis to restore the destroyed parts of his body. By himself, he later learned to use the technique to recreate himself into any form he wished. The first time we knew about it was when a guard, seeing what he thought was me in Garth's cell, released him.
He was such a genius. What a waste.
Force field is on. Good. Remain here out of sight until I give the order to join me. Kirk to Enterprise.
Scott here, sir.
Beam me aboard.
Aye, sir. Queen to queen's level three.
I said beam me aboard.
I said, queen to queen's level three.
We have no time for chess problems. Beam me aboard!
I'm following your orders, Captain. Queen to queen's level three.
Just testing. Be in touch with you later.
(throws a tantrum) No! No! No! (ends up thumping the floor until he changes beck to Garth.
I gave him the sign. Why didn't he give me the countersign?
Something's wrong.
Using the chess problem was the Captain's own suggestion. He couldn't have forgotten it, and I can't believe he was testing me. Lieutenant, re establish communication.
Aye, sir. There's no response, Mister Scott.
Send an armed detail to the transporter room immediately.
Aye, aye, sir.
Mister Sulu, what do your sensors show?
We can't beam anybody down, sir. The force field on the planet is in full operation, and all forms of transport into the asylum dome are blocked off.
We could blast our way through the field, but only at the risk of destroying the Captain, Mister Spock and any other living thing on Elba Two.
How can we be powerful enough to wipe out a planet and still be so helpless?
We are going to take the Enterprise, do you hear me? We are going to take her if I have to shatter every bone in Captain Kirk's body.
Captain? Captain Kirk? Well, I hope you haven't been too uncomfortable, Captain.
Thank you for your concern. All in all, it's been rather restful.
Good. Still, I've been quite remiss in my duties as your host. I did invite you down to dinner, as you may recall.
I'd forgotten.
But I haven't. You and Mister Spock are to be my guests.
Where is Mister Spock?
Right here. Marta!
Why can't I blow off just one of his ears?
Stop that, Marta. Mister Spock will think we're lacking in hospitality. Won't you join us, Captain?
How are you, Mister Spock?
Very well indeed, thank you, Captain.
Isn't Governor Cory joining us?
No, the governor doesn't seem to be on the guest list.
An oversight?
An intentional one. The governor's fasting.
In that case, we must decline with thanks.
(draws a weapon) Captain.
Don't be a fool, Jim. Go along with him.
Good advice, Governor. Well, Captain? You'll find we set a handsome table, and the entertainment is most enjoyable.
You're very persuasive.
Yes, I am. I certainly am.
Keep your hands off Kirk! You treacherous thing!
You're jealous!
I am above that sort of thing. The Captain is annoyed by your attentions, that's all.
Am I annoying you, dearest?
Not really.
He finds me fascinating and you're bothered by it. Admit it.
I may have you beaten to death.
No, you won't, because I am the most beautiful woman on this planet.
You're the only woman on this planet, you stupid cow.
Well, I'm the most beautiful woman in this galaxy!
You're repulsive!
I'm beautiful! And I'm intelligent too. I write poetry, and I paint marvellous pictures. And I am a wonderful dancer.
Lies! All lies! You are the greatest liar I have ever met! Let me hear one poem you've written.
If you like.
(muttering) If you could create a diversion, I might be able to find the control room and open the force field.
All we need is a few seconds, if Scotty has alerted the security detail.
Gentlemen, courtesy for the performer.
Shall I compare thee to a summer's day? Thou art more lovely and more temperate. Rough winds do shake the darling buds of May, and summer's lease hath all too soon
You wrote that?
Yesterday, as a matter of fact.
It was written by an Earth man named Shakespeare a long time ago!
Which does not alter the fact that I wrote it again yesterday! I think it's one of my best poems, don't you?
I may kill you with my bare hands! (Marta runs to the other men) Actually, Captain, she is a superb dancer. Marta, my dear, won't you dance for our guests? That was not a request.
Marvellous, isn't she, Captain?
Yes, er, incredible.
What is your reaction, Mister Spock?
I find it mildly interesting and somewhat nostalgic, if I understand the use of that word.
Nostalgic?
Yes. It is somewhat reminiscent of the dances that Vulcan children do in nursery school. Of course, the children are not so well co-ordinated.
She's yours if you wish, Captain.
Oh, er, thank you. That's, er, very magnanimous of you.
You'll find that I am magnanimous to my friends and merciless to my enemies, and I want you, both of you, to be my friends.
On what, precisely, is our friendship to be based?
Upon the firmest of foundations, Mister Spock. Enlightened self interest. You, Captain, are second only to me as the finest military commander in the galaxy.
That's very flattering. I am primarily an explorer now, Captain Garth.
And so have I been. I have charted more new worlds than any man in history.
And tried to destroy Antos Four.
Why?
Well, I could say because they were actively hostile to the Federation.
Yes, you could say, but that would be untrue.
Agreed. Actually they were quite harmless, and they made me whole when I was maimed and dying. And in my gratitude, I offered them the galaxy. They rejected me, and I condemned them to death.
How could you, a Starship fleet Captain, believe that a Federation crew would blindly obey your order to destroy the entire Antos race, a people famous for their benevolence and peaceful pursuits?
That was my only miscalculation. I had changed. I had risen above this decadent weakness which still has you in its command, by the way, Captain. My crew had not. I couldn't sway them, but my new crew, the men in this room, will obey my orders without question. Gentlemen, you have eyes but you cannot see. Galaxies surround us, limitless vistas. And yet the Federation would have us grub away like some ants on some somewhat larger than usual anthill. But I am not an insect. I am master of the universe, and I must claim my domain.
I agree there was a time when war was necessary, and you were our greatest warrior. I studied your victory at Axanar when I was a cadet. In fact it's still required reading at the Academy.
As well it should be.
Very well. But my first visit to Axanar was as a new fledged cadet on a peace mission.
Peace mission! Politicians and weaklings!
They were humanitarians and statesmen, and they had a dream. A dream that became a reality and spread throughout the stars, a dream that made Mister Spock and me brothers.
Mister Spock, do you consider Captain Kirk and yourself brothers?
Captain Kirk speaks somewhat figuratively and with undue emotion. However, what he says is logical and I do, in fact, agree with it.
Blind! Truly blind! Captain Kirk is your commanding officer and you are his subordinate. That is all. Yet, Mister Spock, you are a worthy commander in your own right, and in my fleet, you will surely have a Starship to command.
Please forgive me, but exactly where is your fleet?
Out there waiting for me. They will flock to my cause, and for good reason. Limitless power, limitless wealth, and solar systems ruled by the elite. We, gentlemen, are that elite, and we must take what is rightfully ours from the decadent weaklings that now hold it.
Captain Garth
Lord Garth!
As you wish. At any rate, you must be aware of the fact that you are attempting to recreate the disaster which resulted in your becoming an inmate in this place.
I was betrayed and treated barbarically.
On the contrary. You were treated with justice, and with compassion which you failed to show towards any of your intended victims. Logically, therefore, one must assume
Remove this animal!
Try some of this wine, Captain. It has a robust, full bodied flavour which you'll find diverting.
No thank you. I prefer to join Mister Spock.
And I prefer that you remain here. Marta, my dear. We found your little divertissement enchanting, didn't we, Captain? But there's more to come. The entertainment has merely begun. By the way, I assume you play chess.
Occasionally.
So do I. How would you respond to queen to queen's level three?
I'm sure you're aware that there are an infinite number of countermoves.
I'm interested in only one.
I can't for the life of me imagine which one.
For the life of me is a phrase well chosen. It could literally come to that.
Dead I am of no use to you.
But I can make you long for death, beg for death.
In the midnight of November, when the dead man's fare is nigh, and the danger in the valley, and the anger in the sky. I wrote that this morning. Do you like it?
Yes, I think it's very good.
Tell him what he wants to know and we'll go away together.
I can't.
But you must. I beg of you.
Oh, don't beg, Marta! It's degrading. Queen to queen's level three, Captain. You'll talk freely and quite soon.
Yes, I recognise it. It's used for rehabilitation purposes.
It helped many men back to health.
Appearances can be deceiving. Once it was a part of the rehabilitation process, and as such, quite painless. And I might add useless too. It made men docile and of no use to me. I've added certain refinements to the use of ultrasonic waves. The chair is no longer painless. Put the governor in it. Queen to queen's level three, Captain Kirk? It is, in fact, exquisitely painful, as you will now see.
Interesting, isn't it? The pain is real and can be prolonged indefinitely, because there is no actual destruction of tissue.
Stop it!
Of course, Captain. You have but to ask. Now, as you can see, he has not been harmed physically, yet the memory of the exquisite torment remains. Queen to queen's level three, Captain.
No.
Too bad. Remove our distinguished governor. Put Captain Kirk in the chair.
No, you mustn't do that!
You really are becoming offensive to me, my dear. Don't make it necessary for me to put you in it. Queen to queen's level three, Captain Kirk.
Please, stop it!
You want him, don't you?
Yes.
Badly enough to join him?
Listen to me, my Lord Garth. I can get him to tell me what you want to know.
It might be interesting to have you try.
No breakthrough?
No, Mister Scott. Still no response from the planet.
Sensor readings?
The force field is weakest on the far side of the planet. We can send down a shuttlecraft carrying a team in environmental suits.
It won't work, Scotty. They'd have to cover thousands of miles through poisonous atmosphere before they'd ever reach the asylum.
Aye, you're right. Even if they made it, they couldn't carry anything powerful enough to break through the asylum dome. Only the ship herself could do that.
Probably kill Jim and Spock.
Slowly, darling, slowly. Rest.
Is this more of Garth's persuasion, Marta?
I told him I'd discover your secret. I lied. I would have told him anything to save you from that torment.
I believe you mean that.
I do. (kisses him) This is where I've longed to be. I think I knew I loved you from the moment I first saw you.
Marta. Marta, I can help you, but I must get to the Enterprise to do that.
That's not possible.
Yes, it is. It is if I can get to the control room and remove the force field, then Garth is finished.
Garth is my leader.
He will lead you to destruction. He's already destroyed the medicine that could have helped you. But there's more medicine aboard the ship.
I'll help you, but you must wait. You do see that, don't you? Soon your friend Spock will be here and then
Spock?
At least I've arranged that much.
How did you manage that?
A convincing lie told to a guard who finds me desirable. Darling.
No, you mustn't stop me. He's my lover and I have to kill him.
She seems to have worked out an infallible method for assuring permanent male fidelity. Interesting.
I'm very glad to see you.
Thank you, Captain. (draws a phaser) We're now armed. I presume we shall try to reach the control room.
Yes, you presume correctly.
Force field is now off, Captain.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Mister Scott, it's the captain.
Scott here, Captain.
You had us worried.
Mister Scott, I want a fully armed security detail beamed down here on the double.
They're already in the transporter room, sir.
And have Doctor McCoy prepare additional medicine as quickly as possible.
Aye, aye, sir.
Captain, I suggest you return to the ship at once. Your safety is vital to the Enterprise.
Waiting for your order, Captain.
I also request permission to remain here in charge of the security team when they beam down.
Very well, Spock.
Still waiting, Captain.
Mister Scott, the Captain's life is in immediate danger. Beam him aboard at once. The security team will be entrusted to me.
Queen to queen's level three. Repeat. Queen to queen's level three.
He's waiting for the proper reply, Captain.
Give the countersign as ordered.
Scotty, Mister Spock will give the countersign.
Give him the countersign, Captain.
Security detail, standby to beam down.
Blast away, Captain, if you can. Do you think I'm fool enough to give you a charged phaser?
What have you done with Spock? Where is he?
I have done nothing with him as of yet, but I do have plans for him. The Vulcan will die rather horribly, and his death will be on your conscience.
Captain Garth
Lord Garth!
No, sir. Captain Garth, Starship fleet Captain. That's an honourable title.
And I was the greatest of them all, wasn't I?
Yes, you were. Yes. But you're a sick man now, sir.
I have never been more healthy.
No. No, think. Think back to what you were before the accident that sent you to Antos Four. Try.
I can't remember. It's almost as if I had died and was reborn.
No, I, I can remember. You were the finest student at the Academy, the finest Starship Captain. You were the prototype, the model for the rest of us.
Yes, I do remember that. It was a great responsibility, but one I was proud to bear.
And you bore it well. And the disease that changed you, it's not your fault. And the terrible things you did since then, not truly responsible.
I don't want to hear any more. You're weak, you're trying to drain my strength.
No, I'm not. I want you to find what you once had. I want you to go back to the greatness that you've lost, Captain Garth.
I am Lord Garth! Master of the universe! You doubt me only because I have not as yet had my coronation.
No, sir, listen to me. I
Stop! On your knees.
No.
On your knees before me! All the others before me have failed. Alexander, Caesar, Napoleon, Hitler, Lee Kuan, Krotus! All of them are dust! But I will triumph! I will make the ultimate conquest!
The throne must be higher. It must be higher than anything else in this room. Use that table as a pedestal. Ah, welcome back, Captain Kirk. I'm glad you could make it for the coronation.
Coronation?
Yes. Oh, I know that even a real throne is no more than merely a chair, but the symbolism is important, don't you agree?
Yes, I agree. You'll wear a crown too, I presume?
But again, just as a token. Not impressive in itself, but it will serve as a standard around which our followers will rally.
Garth, you have only a handful of men.
You do refuse to enter into the spirit of the thing, don't you, Captain? Perhaps you'd like a larger role in the ceremony. You could serve as human sacrifice, for example.
No, I wouldn't enjoy that at all. Besides, you seem to need me alive.
How true. All right, how about crown prince? That would make you our heir apparent. Heir apparent, I believe, is the proper role for you. Besides, we have other candidates for our human sacrifice. Who knows? Ready.
Well, since there is no one mighty enough to perform this ceremony, we'll perform it ourselves. Therefore, we hereby proclaim that I am Lord Garth, master of the universe. And we designate our beloved Marta to be our consort. And we further designate Captain James Kirk of the Starship Enterprise to be our heir apparent.
Now remove our heir apparent that we may conclude this ceremony.
Listen to me. This may be our last chance. Garth will destroy all of us unless you help me stop him. And he's using you, you know that, because he wants the power for himself. I brought something that might have cured you, but he destroyed it. If I can get a patrol down, they'd bring more of that medicine and
Well done. Well, Captain, you continue to resist. How stupid of you. Put him in that chair right here. I've arranged a small entertainment. I wouldn't want him to miss any of it. Well, Captain, even you must admit that I'm a genius. What you see here is my latest invention. This is an explosive, the most powerful one in history. If I were to drop this flask, the resulting explosion would vaporise this planet. Now do you see why it is ridiculous to resist me? Well, perhaps you require the demonstration I've arranged. Watch closely.
Now, it is true that she is deadly as a poisonous serpent, but she is also a beautiful woman, and you have held her in your arms, Captain. I've ordered my men to drive her out of the protective dome. And, of course, she would choke to death on the outside in minutes.
But I've arranged a more merciful end for her because after all, Captain, she is my consort. One tiny crystal implanted in her necklace, a portion of this explosive no bigger than a grain of sand. I propose to detonate it from here.
Poor girl. Poor, dear, suffering child. I will help her now.
There's been an explosion on Elba Two!
Point nine five!
It must've wiped out everything.
Immediate probe. Is the force field in place, Mister Sulu?
Yes, sir. Solidly.
(at Spock's station) Life continues to exist on the planet.
Got to break through it somehow.
Doctor, I told you we couldn't do it without killing everyone in the asylum dome.
I know it, Scotty.
Well, there's one last thing we might try. Perhaps the ship's phasers can cut through a section of the force field at its weakest point. Where did you say that was located, Mister Sulu?
On the far side of the planet, Mister Scott.
Will it leave a margin of safety for the people below?
Yes, sir.
Prepare to change orbital path, Mister Sulu.
Orbital co-ordinates released, sir.
Break synchronous orbit. Come to course one four mark six eight.
Course one four mark six eight. Synchronous orbit re-established, sir.
Ship's phasers to narrow beam.
Ship's phasers ready, sir.
Let's punch a hole in it. Full power. Another blast, full power. 
Force field still holding, sir.
Here.
How are your nerves, Kirk?
All I can say, Garth, if it happens to me, it happens to you.
You're an extraordinary fellow, Kirk. Your stubbornness defies all logic. Logic, that is the key. Your friend Spock is a logical man. A very logical man. Go and bring the Vulcan here to me.
Spock is not only a more logical man than you, Captain, but a more intelligent one, I'm sure. I shall establish a rapport with him.
Fascinating. Your Vulcan friend is a very ingenious fellow. This could be most amusing.
Queen to queen's level three.
Arranging to beam down a security team. Are there any objections?
Fascinating. What maneuver did we use to defeat the Romulan vessel near Tau Ceti?
Agreed, Captain. Captains. Gentlemen, whichever one of you is Captain Garth must at this moment be expending a great deal of energy to maintain the image of Captain Kirk. That energy level cannot be maintained indefinitely, and I have time.
(with chair) I'm your Captain, Spock! Can't you tell? Shoot! Shoot!
(on floor) He's right, Spock. You must shoot, but shoot both of us. It's the only way to ensure the safety of the Enterprise.
Captain Kirk, I presume.
Mister Spock.
Spock to Enterprise.
Enterprise here. Queen to queen's level three.
Queen to king's level one.
Will intramuscular injection be satisfactory?
Intravenous is indicated unless circumstances make it impossible.
How long before it takes effect, Doctor McCoy?
Reversal of arterial and brain damage should begin almost immediately.
Captain Garth, I'm James Kirk.
I am Mister Spock, science officer on a Starship.
The starship Enterprise.
Starship. Starship.
Yes, sir, the Enterprise. I'm the captain. (Kirk and Garth shake hands) Can I help?
No, Captain. The medicine seems to be taking effect. I can manage. It's very encouraging.
Should I know you, sir?
No, Captain. No.
Mister Spock.
Yes, Captain.
Tell me something. Why was it so impossible to tell the difference between us?
It was not impossible, Captain. Our presence here is proof of that.
Yes, and congratulations. What took you so long?
The interval of uncertainty was actually fairly brief, Captain. It only seemed long to you. I was waiting for a victor in the hand to hand struggle, which I assumed would be Captain Garth. Because of your depleted condition. Failing a resolution to the struggle, I was forced to use other means to make my determination.
I see. Mister Spock. Letting yourself be hit on the head, and I presume you let yourself be hit on the head, is not exactly a method King Solomon would have approved. Mister Scott, ready to beam up.
Aye, aye, sir.
Let That Be Your Last Battlefield
Mister Chekov, our estimated time of arrival for Ariannus?
At present speed, our eta is three hours, four minutes, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, advise the planet's ministry of health that we'll begin decontamination procedures immediately upon locking into orbit.
Aye, aye, sir.
Scotty, will that present any problems for you?
None, sir. All tanks are being positioned.
Captain, sensors indicate a space vehicle of some sort ahead.
Is it within visual range?
Coming into range now, sir. It's following a very erratic course.
Put it on the screen, extreme magnification.
I think that may be a Starfleet shuttlecraft.
That is exactly what it is, Mister Chekov.
It looks like the one reported stolen from Starbase Four two weeks ago.
Lieutenant Uhura, try to contact them on command frequency two.
Aye, Captain. No response, sir.
Try all frequencies.
Aye, sir. Hailing on all frequencies.
Captain, there is one living creature aboard. Humanoid. He is either injured or ill. His craft shows internal atmospheric leakage. The creature may be suffocating.
Lieutenant Sulu, activate tractor beams.
Tractor beams activated. We have it, sir.
Prepare to bring it aboard the hangar deck.
Aye, sir.
Lieutenant Uhura, send a security team to the pressure doors on the hangar deck.
Aye, sir.
Mister Spock, come with me. Scotty.
Hangar doors open and clearing for entrance of shuttlecraft. Shuttlecraft approaching hangar deck.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Hangar doors closed, and hangar deck is pressurising.
Acknowledged.
(to security men) We'll enter as soon as the doors open. Go on my command.
You are certain, Doctor, that this pigmentation is the natural condition of this individual?
That's what I've recorded, Mister Spock.
Do we have any knowledge of a planet that could have produced such a race of beings?
Negative, Captain.
Bones, what do you make of it?
Well, I can't give you any specific circumstance that will explain him.
And judging by looking at him, we know at the very least he is the result of a very dramatic conflict. Spock?
There is no theory, Captain, from the basic work of Mendel to recent nucleotide studies, which would explain our captive. All gradations of colour from black to brown, to yellow to white are genetically predictable. We must therefore conclude that this alien is that often unaccountable rarity, a mutation, one of a kind.
Yes, I would agree. That's the case here.
Your prognosis, Doctor?
Well, I can't give you one, Jim. I've never worked on anyone like him or anything like him.
Yet you are pumping him full of your noxious potions as if he were a human.
When in doubt, the book prevails, Mister Spock. I've run tests. Blood is blood, even when it's green like yours. The organs are there. They're rearranged to a degree, plus a few I've never seen before. Now, I've enriched the oxygen content of his blood and pumped in a strong stimulant. And I must say his recuperative powers appear to be excellent.
With your permission, Captain, I shall do some further research and join you on the bridge.
He's coming around, Doctor.
Well, touch and go there for a minute, but you're out of danger now.
You're aboard the starship Enterprise.
I've heard of it. It's in the United Fleet of Planets?
Federation. So was the shuttlecraft that you were flying in.
It was?
Don't you usually know whose property you've stolen?
I am not a thief.
Well, certainly no ordinary thief, considering what it is you appropriated.
You're being very loose with your accusations and drawing conclusions without any facts.
Well, I do know you made off with a ship that didn't belong to you.
I do not make off with things. My need gave me the right to use the ship. Mark the word, sir, the use of it.
You can try those technical evasions on Starfleet Command. That's where you'll be facing your charges.
I'm grateful for your rescue.
Don't mention it. We're pleased to have caught you. Who are you?
My name is Lokai.
Go on.
From the planet Cheron.
That's in the southernmost part of the galaxy, in an uncharted quarter. What are you doing so far from home? (no answer) You understand that when we complete our mission, we'll take you to Starbase where you'll face a very serious charge.
The charge is trifling. I would've returned the ship as soon as I
Had what? What were you going to do?
You monotone humans are all alike. First you condemn and then attack. I will answer no more questions.
Well, however we view him, Captain, he's certainly no ordinary specimen. Lokai, I don't know what's normal for you exactly, but if I had your readings, I'd be the most incredible physical specimen of all time.
We've never encountered a being like you. I'd like to know more about you and your planet.
I'm very tired.
And very evasive. Or at least not fully responsive. Now, then,
I insist, I'm extremely tired. Made so by your vindictive cross-examinations. I will answer no more questions.
Lieutenant Uhura.
Lieutenant Uhura here.
Notify Starbase Four that we've recovered its shuttlecraft, and it will be returned along with its user as soon as we've completed our mission at Ariannus.
Aye, sir.
Bones, if you're satisfied that the mutation theory is applicable, I'll make a note of it in my report.
Unless we get more information from him, it'll have to serve.
Kirk here.
Captain, contact with alien ship, sir.
I'll be right there. Notify Mister Spock.
Put the ship on the viewing screen, Mister Sulu. Magnification. Still nothing, Mister Chekov.
I verify, sir, it's out there.
Maximum magnification. I draw a blank, Mister Spock. Your response?
Negative, Captain.
No malfunction, sir. The reading persists.
What is it?
There is a vessel out there, Captain.
Could it be a Romulan ship using their cloaking device?
Negative. This would not be a Romulan vessel. It is totally alien in configuration. Motive power unknown. Small size of the craft indicates a rapid scout vessel, one or two-man crew.
Captain, I've tried all hailing frequencies. Negative, sir.
Weaponry on the vessel, Spock?
Nothing identifiable. The craft appears to be built for speed rather than combat.
Something out there can't be seen. Explanation?
None. Completely elusive. In fact, it's invisible.
Invisible. Malfunction?
There is no sensor failure. The readings persist.
It's headed straight for us!
Evasive action.
It shifts with us, sir. And we're pushing to the limit!
Deflector shields activated, Mister Sulu.
Automatic, sir.
We're on collision course.
It's out of control or a suicide mission.
Sound warning for collision. Red Alert.
Brace yourself for collision. Brace yourself.
Read out, Mister Spock.
It just disintegrated. Fascinating.
What is it now?
It is gone now, Captain, but it seems to have deposited an alien presence.
Where?
Right here, Captain.
Explain, Spock. One of a kind?
I am Bele.
Of the planet Cheron, no doubt.
Forgive my unorthodox arrival.
Your mode of travel was also unorthodox. Secure from Red Alert. What happened to your vehicle?
It served me long and durably. Unfortunately, the strain of arduous pursuit has exceeded even its advanced qualities. I was just able to complete this trip and disembark in time, or I would have disintegrated in space with it.
A most unique craft. Pity it couldn't be salvaged for our study.
Yes. It was sheathed in special materials that rendered it invisible.
What brings you to us?
You bear precious cargo, Lokai. He has taken refuge aboard this ship. I am here to claim him.
All personnel aboard this vessel are subject to my command. No one claims anyone without due process.
My apologies, Captain. I overstepped my powers. Claim is undoubtedly an unfortunate word.
What is your authorisation? From what source?
I am chief officer of the Commission on Political Traitors. Lokai was tried and convicted of treason, but had escaped. May I see him, please?
He's in Sickbay. Remember, since you're aboard the Enterprise, you're bound by its regulations.
With your permission, Captain.
Mister Spock.
Well, Lokai, it's a pleasure to see you again. This time I'm sure our joining will be of a more permanent nature. Captain, you are to be congratulated. Never before has Lokai been rendered so quiescent.
I will not return to Cheron with him, to a land of murdering oppressors!
I told you where you were going. I allowed your fellow countryman here simply as a courtesy.
And you see how this killer repays you, as he repays all his benefactors.
Benefactors? He's a liar. He raided our homes, tore us from our families, herded us together like cattle and then sold us as slaves!
They were savages, Captain. We took them into our hearts, our homes. We educated them.
Yes, just education enough to serve the master race.
You were the product of our love! And you repaid us with murder.
Why should a slave show mercy to the enslaver?
Slaves? That was changed thousands of years ago. You were freed.
Freed? Were we free to be men? Free to be husbands and fathers? Free to live our lives in equality and dignity?
Yes, you were free, if you knew how to use your freedom. You were free enough to slaughter and to burn all the things that had been built!
I tried to break the chains of a hundred million people. My only crime is that I failed. To that I do plead guilty.
There is an order in things. He asked for utopia in a day. It can't be done.
Not in a day. And not in ten times ten thousand years by your thinking. To you, we are a loathsome breed who will never be ready. Genocide for my people is the plan for your utopia.
You insane, you filthy little plotter of ruin. You vicious subverter of every decent thought. Oh, you're coming back to pay for your crimes!
I know you and all those with whom you're plotting to take power permanently. When I return to Cheron, you will understand what power is. I will have armies of followers.
It's now very clear you know each other extremely well, gentlemen. The only service this ship can offer is to bring you together. It is not a battlefield.
Captain, I led revolutionaries, not criminals. I demand political asylum. This ship is a sanctuary.
I'll tell you once more. For you, this ship is a prison.
Captain, it is imperative that you return Lokai to Cheron for judgment.
Commissioner, Cheron is not a member of the Federation. No treaties have ever been signed. Your demand for possession of this prisoner cannot be honoured. There are no extradition procedures to allow it. Is that clear, Commissioner Bele?
Captain, I hope you will be sensible.
How do you mean?
Co-operation.
I cannot take sides.
Since I am without a vessel to return to Cheron, I insist that you take us there immediately.
Impossible. I have a mission to accomplish. There's a planet to be decontaminated. Millions of lives are at stake. Once that has been completed, I'll return to Starbase Four and turn you both over to the authorities. You can make your case to them.
I am sorry, Captain. That will not be satisfactory, not at all satisfactory.
Commissioner, as a visiting dignitary from a far planet, I offer you every hospitality aboard this ship. Choose any other course,
You're the captain.
Yes, I am. I think we can consider your problem settled. At least for the present. I have ordered guest quarters for you on deck six.
And I suggest you get a great deal of rest, especially your vocal chords. It seems you'll have a double opportunity to practise your oratory on Starbase Four.
Chekov to Captain Kirk. Chekov to Captain Kirk. Urgent.
Kirk here.
Captain, we're off course.
Well, get back on course.
That's just it, sir. The ship's taken a new heading all by itself.
I'll be right there.
Have you located the malfunction?
No, sir. The ship is unresponsive. We're moving away from Ariannus.
Explanation, Mister Spock?
Elusive, Captain. I am investigating.
I can't understand it. I simply have no control.
Kirk to engineering.
Scott here.
Scotty, we're suddenly off course. Check our manoeuvering controls.
Aye, sir. Hold. Captain, no malfunction indicated.
Switch to auxiliary.
Aye, sir. Out. (presses a lot of buttons.) Engineer to bridge.
Kirk here.
On auxiliary, sir.
Stand by for check. Scotty, we're still off course.
I'll be right up.
Speed, Mister Chekov.
We're moving at warp eight.
And new course?
four oh three mark seven. Straight for the Coal Sack if there is no letup.
Lieutenant Uhura, put the ship on Red Alert. All hands, this is the captain. The ship is on Red Alert.
Repeat, the ship is on Red Alert. There has been an unidentified malfunction in the ship's directional control.
Repeat, the ship is off course and out of our control.
Our new heading, Mister Chekov?
Four oh three mark seven.
Spock?
Confirmed, Captain. Holding pattern. Co-ordinates now indicate we are charting course to (pause) Captain, Cheron lies between four oh three mark seven and mark nine.
We're on the way to Cheron. Captain, this ship is now under my direction. For fifty thousand of your terrestrial years, I have been pursuing Lokai through the galaxy. I have not travelled this far, this long, only to give him up. This ship goes where my will drives it.
Captain, we are now at warp ten and the speed is increasing!
Captain, course is now clearly straight for Cheron, despite all efforts to direct us to Ariannus.
I will not return to Cheron. Captain, you must guarantee me sanctuary.
He cannot help you now. You are lost, Lokai. You're on the way to judgment, to final punishment.
Stop him.
You evil mound of filth. Not this time.
My cause is just. You must help me. All of you must help me.
Oh, the old cry. Pity me, pity me. Everywhere he's gone, he's been helped to escape. On every planet he's found fools who bleed for him and shed tears for the oppressed one. But there is no escape for you on this ship. This is your last sanctuary.
Kill him. Kill him!
You're two of a kind.
And we are both going to Cheron. You cannot change the course of this ship any more than you can change me. This ship goes where I want it to go.
Security, put them both in the brig.
Phasers on stun. Fire. (no effect)
Your phasers are ineffective against our shields. You are helpless, Captain.
What a fool I am, expecting help from someone like you.
This ship is going to Ariannus.
No, this ship is going to Cheron. I will let nothing interfere.
We are going to Ariannus. The lives of a billion people make no other choice possible.
You are being obtuse, Captain. I am permitting no choice. My will now controls this, and nothing can break it.
Bele, I am captain of this ship, and it will follow whatever course I set for it, or I will order its destruction.
You're bluffing.
I will destroy it.
You can no more destroy this ship than I can change colour.
Lieutenant Uhura, tie in the bridge to the master computer.
Aye, sir.
Computer, destruct sequence. Are you ready to copy?
Working.
Prepare to verify destruct sequence code one. Computer, this is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. Destruct sequence one, code one, one A.
Mister Spock.
This is Commander Spock, science officer. Destruct sequence number two, code one, one A, two B.
Voice and code verified and correct. Sequence two complete.
Mister Scott.
This is Lieutenant Commander Scott, chief engineering officer of the USS Enterprise. Destruct sequence number three, code one B, two B, three.
Voice and code one B, two B, three verified and correct. Destruct sequence completed and engaged. Awaiting final code for thirty second countdown.
Mister Spock, has the ship returned to the course set for it by my orders?
Negative, Captain. We are still headed directly for Cheron.
Destruct sequence engaged. Awaiting final code for thirty second countdown.
Computer, this is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. Begin thirty second countdown. Code zero, zero, zero, destruct zero.
Thirty seconds. twenty nine, twenty eight, twenty seven, (break) twenty five seconds,
Let's see you prevent the computer from fulfilling my commands.
Twenty seconds,
From five to zero, no command in the universe can prevent the computer from fulfilling its destruct orders.
Fifteen seconds,
You can use your will to drag this ship to Cheron. But I command the computer. Mine is the final command.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six,
I agree!
Computer. This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. Code one, two, three continuity. Abort destruct order. Repeat code one, two, three continuity. Abort destruct order.
Destruct order aborted. Destruct order aborted.
Mister Spock, is this ship headed for Ariannus?
Negative, Captain. The Enterprise is now moving in a circular course.
And at warp ten, we're going now here mighty fast.
I warned you of his treachery. Kill him!
We're waiting for you to fulfil your commitment, Commissioner.
Captain, I am happy to have you complete your mission of mercy to the planet Ariannus. It was madness to interfere with such a worthwhile endeavour. But, if you will, upon completion, please take me and my traitorous captive to Cheron.
I make no deals for control of this ship, sir.
The ship's course is now in your control.
Ship's course?
Enterprise is now on course to Ariannus, Captain.
Speed, Scotty?
Warp six and smoothly operating, sir.
Good. Lieutenant Uhura, cancel Red Alert.
Aye, sir.
Let me reaffirm my position, gentlemen. I could put you in the brig for what you have done, but I won't do it because you are new to this part of the galaxy, which is governed by the United Federation of Planets. We live in peace with full exercise of individual rights. The need to resort to violence and force has long since passed, and it will not be tolerated aboard this ship. You are free to move about the ship. I hope that you'll take the opportunity to know more about the Federation through its best representatives, my crew. But let me make it clear. I will stand for no interference with the function of this ship. All hands, return to normal routine. Captain out.
You speak very well, Captain. Your words promise justice for all.
We try, sir.
Yes, well, I have learned to wait for actions. After Ariannus, what is justice? I shall wait to see it dispensed.
Fascinating. Two irrevocably hostile humanoids.
Disgusting is what I call them.
That description is not scientifically accurate.
Mister Spock, the word disgusting describes exactly what I feel about those two.
That's enough for today. Those two are beginning to affect you.
And I know from my actions you must all think me a volcanic hothead, erupting lava from my nostrils at danger signals that are only figments of my imagination. But believe me, my friends, there can be no moment when I can have my guard down where such as Bele is present. So what happens? I act the madman out of the anger and frustration he forces upon me, and thereby prove his point that I am a madman.
No one knows how he'll react under pressure, Lokai.
After all, we are only human.
Ah, Mister Chekov, therein lies my lack of ability to alert you and your captain to the real threat of someone like Bele. You see, you are from the planet Earth. There is no persecution on your planet. How can you understand my fear, my apprehension, my degradation, my suffering?
There was persecution on Earth once. I remember reading about it in my history class.
Yes, but it happened way back in the twentieth century. There's no such primitive thinking today.
You have read about it in history, I see. How can I make your flesh know how it feels to see all those who are like you, and only because they are like you, despised, slaughtered, and even worse, denied the simplest bit of decency that is a living being's right? Do you know what it would be like to be dragged out of your hovel into a war on another planet? A battle that will serve your oppressor and bring death to you and your brothers?
Putting the matter into the hands of your Starfleet Command is, of course, the proper procedure. How long will it be before we hear from them, Captain?
I expect the answer is already on its way.
Well, then, let us drink to their wise solution to our problem.
Let's do that.
Commissioner, Starfleet Command may not arrive at the solution you anticipate. There is the matter of the shuttlecraft which Lokai appropriated. The interrogation of that matter may be of paramount importance to Starfleet.
Gentlemen, we are discussing a question of degree. Surely, stealing a shuttlecraft cannot be equated with the importance of murdering thousands of people.
We do not know that Lokai has done that.
One thing we are agreed on is that Lokai is a criminal.
No, Commissioner. The one thing we're agreed upon is that Lokai took a shuttlecraft.
Excuse me.
Uhura to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
I have a communication from Starfleet Command, sir.
Yes, read it.
Starfleet Command extends greetings to Commissioner Bele of the planet Cheron. His urgent request to be transported to his planet with the man he claims prisoner has been taken under consideration.
It is with great regret that we cannot honour that request. Intergalactic treaty clearly specifies that no being can be extradited without due process. In view of the circumstances, we have no doubt that after a hearing at Starbase, Commissioner Bele will be permitted to retain his prisoner and be provided transportation
That's enough. Thank you.
As always, Lokai has managed to gain allies.
Now, wait a minute, Commissioner,
Even if they don't recognise themselves as being such. Yes, he will evade, delay, and escape again and in the process put thousands of innocent beings at each other's throats, getting them to kill and maim for a cause which they have no stake in, but which he will force them to violently espouse by twisting their minds with his lies, his loathsome accusations and his foul threats.
I can assure you, Commissioner, that our minds will not be twisted, not by Lokai, nor by you.
It is obvious to the most simpleminded that Lokai is of an inferior breed.
The obvious visual evidence, Commissioner, is that he is of the same breed as yourself.
Are you blind, Commander Spock? Well, look at me. Look at me!
You're black on one side and white on the other.
I am black on the right side.
I fail to see the significant difference.
Lokai is white on the right side. All of his people are white on the right side.
Commissioner, perhaps the experience of my own planet Vulcan may set an example of some value to you. Vulcan was in danger of being destroyed by the same conditions and characteristics which threaten to destroy Cheron. We were once a people like yourselves, wildly emotional, often committed to irrationally opposing points of view, leading, of course, to death and destruction. Only the discipline of logic saved my planet from extinction.
Commander Spock, I am delighted that Vulcan was saved, but you cannot expect Lokai and people like him to act with self-discipline any more than you can expect a planet to stop orbiting its sun.
Let Lokai state his grievances. Hear him, listen to him. Maybe he can change. Maybe he wants to change his image.
He cannot change.
Change is the essential process of all existence. For instance, the people of Cheron must have once been mono-coloured.
You mean like both of you?
There must have been a time, long ago no doubt, when that was true.
Excuse me. Kirk here.
We're orbiting Ariannus, sir.
Very good. Commence decontamination procedures when ready. Advise when complete.
At once, sir. Scott out.
I once heard that on some of your planets people believe they are descended from apes.
The actual theory is that all life-forms evolved from the lower levels to the more advanced stages.
Ready for decontamination procedure.
Ready, sir.
Ready here.
Ready, Mister Scott.
Mister Sulu, lock into co-ordinates requested by Ariannus.
Locked in, sir.
Mister Chekov, position tanks for spray release.
Tanks positioned.
Lieutenant Uhura, advise Ariannus the mission is to begin on signal. All ground precautions must be ready.
Ariannus says go ahead.
Well, let 'er rip.
Scott to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
First run complete, sir.
Good. Repeat procedure for maximum effect.
Aye, sir. Ready to repeat decontamination procedure.
Ready, sir.
Mister Sulu?
Ready here.
Kirk here.
We're completing the final orbit of Ariannus, sir. I'm awaiting instructions to set course for the next destination.
Very good. We'll be right up.
Set directional controls for Starbase Four. Kirk out. Will you join us on the bridge?
There is nothing I would like more.
Trouble, Mister Chekov?
I don't rightly know, Mister Spock. I was trying to programme for Starbase Four as ordered. I can't get a response.
It just seemed to go dead, sir.
Captain, some of the memory banks of the computer are burned out.
Can you determine which ones?
The directional control and the self-destruct, Captain, are both burnt out. I did it like this.
Now can we go to Cheron without any more discussion?
At the moment, I seem to have no choice.
So this is justice after Ariannus! You have signed my death warrant. I warned you what to expect. Will you continue to let this mockery of justice go on? If you are partisans of justice, prove it! Kill him!
We are not killers.
What do you do, carry justice on your tongues? You will beg for it, but you won't fight or die for it.
After so many years of leading the fight, you seem very much alive.
I doubt that the same can be said for many of his followers.
You're finished, Lokai! We've got your kind penned in on Cheron into little districts, and it's not going to change. You've combed the galaxy and come up with nothing but mono-coloured trash, do-gooders and bleeding hearts. You're dead, you half-white!
You useless pieces of bland flesh. I'll take you with me, you half-black.
Bele, you keep this up, and you'll never get to Cheron with your prisoner. The rest of this ship will be irreparably damaged. This will be your final battlefield. Your fifty thousand years of pursuit will have been wasted.
And you, Lokai, will die here in space. You'll inspire no more disciples. Your cause will be ended.
Remember, Captain, political sanctuary is my right. I am your prisoner. Honour that right, or the fight will go on and your ship will burn up.
You've made your point.
If you listen to his legalistic trickery, I shall have to destroy this ship and everybody aboard.
I understand. Will you return the Enterprise to my control?
Why not?
Scotty, have repairs on directional control been completed?
Aye, sir. Re-routed.
Check controls and co-ordinates.
Controls operating. The Enterprise is responding as always. Captain, it's beautiful.
Locking onto co-ordinates.
Captain, we are within scanning range of Cheron.
Is it within visual range?
Coming within visual range now, Captain.
Chekov, put it on the screen. Extreme magnification. What are you picking up?
Several large cities, uninhabited. Extensive traffic systems, barren of traffic. Lower animal sand vegetation encroaching on the cities. No sapient life-forms registering at all, Captain. There is no evidence of natural disaster, yet there are vast numbers of unburied corpses in all cities.
You mean, all the people are dead?
All dead, Captain. They have annihilated each other totally.
My people, all dead?
Yes, Commissioner, all of them.
No one alive?
None at all, sir.
Your band of murderers did this.
Your genocidal maniacs did this!
Stop it! What's the matter with you two? Didn't you hear Spock? Your planet is dead! There's nobody alive on Cheron because of hate. The cause you fought about no longer exists. Give yourselves time to breathe. Give up your hate. You're welcome to live with us. Listen to me. You both must end up dead if you don't stop hating.
You're an idealistic dreamer.
Bele. The chase is finished.
He must not escape me.
Where can he go?
Bele.
Shall I alert security, sir?
No, Lieutenant. Where can they run?
Captain, I have located them on ship's sensors. Bele is chasing Lokai on deck three. Bele is passing recreation room three, approaching the crewmen's lounge. Lokai is running past the crewmen's lounge. Lokai has just arrived on deck five. Passing recreation room three.
Captain, someone has activated the transporter mechanism.
Spock, anyone in the transporter room?
Negative, Captain. Transporter room is clear. However, there is a life-form materialising on the planet. It is Lokai. He is back on Cheron.
There's nobody there to try him. His judges are all dead.
Captain, the transporter mechanism has been activated again.
Of course.
It is Bele, Captain. And another life-form has appeared on Cheron.
It doesn't make any sense.
To expect sense from two mentalities of such extreme viewpoints is not logical.
But their planet's dead. Does it matter now which one's right?
Not to Lokai and Bele. All that matters to them is their hate.
Do you suppose that's all they ever had, sir?
No, but that's all they have left. Warp factor two, Mister Sulu. Set course for Starbase Four.
The Mark Of Gideon
I shall be interested in hearing your description, Captain.
You won't have long to wait.
Lieutenant Uhura.
Yes, Mister Spock.
Do we have final clearance from Gideon?
Yes, Mister Spock. They have provided us with the co-ordinates for beam down.
May I have them, please?
Eight seven five.
Eight seven five.
Zero two zero.
Zero two zero.
Zero seven nine.
Zero seven nine.
Let's go, Mister Spock.
Energising.
Mister Spock? (goes to intercom) Mister Spock. I have not yet transported down. Why did you leave your post before confirming transport? Mister Spock? Spock?
Engineering?
Mister Scott? Scotty!
Lieutenant Uhura, report immediately. All bridge personnel, report immediately.
Kirk to crew. Is anyone aboard?
Sickbay? Doctor McCoy?
Bones? Bones, answer me.
Bones. Still orbiting Gideon.
I am alone on the Enterprise. I have searched every area of the ship and still cannot find a trace of the crew, or an indication of how its disappearance was managed. The one thing that is obvious is that I suffered a memory lapse, during which time I bruised my arm. It is causing me some irritation.
Gideon is contacting us, Mister Spock.
Put it on the screen.
Aye, sir.
Captain Kirk, this is Ambassador Hodin. The council is still awaiting your arrival.
This is Mister Spock, Ambassador Hodin. Captain Kirk was transported down minutes ago.
That's impossible.
I transported him myself.
He never arrived.
He was beamed directly to your council chambers. Please verify your co-ordinates.
Eight seven five, zero two zero, zero seven nine.
Co-ordinates confirmed.
We gave you the exact co-ordinates which should have brought Captain Kirk directly to this very room.
I am not questioning that, sir.
If he is not here, that is your own responsibility, Mister Spock, and that of your staff.
I do not deny that, sir. I am not attempting to blame your personnel.
We are glad to hear that. We shall enter it into the records of this most unfortunate event.
Your Excellency, even with intricate machinery as delicately balanced as ours, there is still a margin for error which must be dealt with.
It is possible that Captain Kirk materialised on some other part of Gideon.
Let us hope it was on dry land.
Your Excellency. May I cut right to the heart of the matter? I request permission to beam down to conduct a search for our captain.
Permission denied.
Your Federation must be aware
Of our jealous tradition of isolation from all contaminating contacts
With the violent nature of planets of other star systems.
Your Excellency, the wars between opposing star systems no longer prevail in our galaxy. If you will grant permission
Of course, we shall institute a thorough search. In the meantime, Mister Spock, I suggest that you look to your machinery.
We must acknowledge once and for all that the purpose of diplomacy is to prolong a crisis.
Well, what are we waiting for, Mister Spock? We're not diplomats.
We are representatives of the Federation, Doctor.
That doesn't mean we have behave like children and listen to some fool lecture by a diplomat!
Unfortunately, diplomacy is the only channel available to us at the moment. The planet is shielded from our sensors, therefore we cannot scan it. Therefore we are unable to select co-ordinates. They must be provided by Gideon.
We should never have agreed to such restrictions.
We did not, Mister Chekov. The Federation did. Lieutenant Uhura.
Yes, Mister Spock.
Contact Starfleet immediately. Explain our problem. Request permission to use every means at our disposal to press the search for Captain Kirk.
At once, sir.
Are there any other possibilities?
There are endless, Mister Chekov.
Well, where do we start, Mister Spock?
Institute a sensor scan three hundred and sixty degrees, one degree at a time.
You mean you're going to scan space for him?
But, sir, that could take years.
Then the sooner you begin, the better.
Aye, sir.
Who are you?
Odona. Yes, my name is Odona. Why did you bring me here?
What are you doing on my ship?
Is this entire ship yours?
Not my personal property, but I'm the captain.
And you have it all to yourself?
It seems, at the moment, we have it all to ourselves.
You're hurting me, Captain
Kirk. I'm sorry. James Kirk. And I didn't bring you here.
If you didn't bring me
That's right. Who has brought you here?
I don't know.
You? What happened before you came here? Try to remember. It's important.
It seems I was standing in a, yes. I was standing in a large auditorium crowded with people. Thousands pressed in against me. I could hardly breathe. I was fighting for oxygen, screaming to get out.
Don't be afraid.
I'm not, but you are troubled.
I seem to be the only one of my crew left on board the Enterprise. Four hundred and thirty, and I, apparently, am the only one left.
I'm sorry. I wish I could help.
Maybe you can. Tell me the rest. You were fighting for oxygen, screaming to get out of there.
And then I, suddenly I was here on this, on your ship. And there was all this space. And the freedom. I just wanted to float. And then there you were.
How long have you been aboard the Enterprise?
I don't know. Not long. Is it important?
It might be. Come with me.
Lieutenant Uhura, has Starfleet honoured our request with a reply?
There has been no response as yet, sir.
Did you advise them the captain's life is at stake?
Yes, sir. They insist that the matter must be referred to the Federation.
What department?
Bureau of Planetary Treaties.
Contact them directly.
I did, Mister Spock. They insist that we must go through Starfleet channels.
With the captain lost, sir, that's the best they could come up with?
Diplomats and bureaucrats may function differently, but they achieve exactly the same results.
Nine minutes of my life has been lost.
I don't understand.
Between the time I tried to beam down to Gideon and the time I found myself here alone, nine minutes have disappeared just like that. Now what happened during those minutes?
What is Gideon?
That's your home. The planet that you come from.
Is it?
It must be.
Gideon? I don't know any Gideon.
That's impossible. We were in synchronous orbit over the capital city of Gideon. I tried to beam down, something happened, and you were beamed aboard from Gideon.
I do not think so.
We're no longer over Gideon.
Where are we?
I don't know. I'm not familiar with that quadrant. Odona, you must realise that we're not here by accident. Some force, some intelligence has arranged this for a purpose.
Captain, before I said I wasn't afraid. Now I am.
The ambassador will speak, sir. They're requesting visual communication.
Good news. Very good news indeed, Mister Spock. Your captain is definitely not on Gideon. As you requested, we made a most thorough search, and you will be relieved to know that you may now investigate all the other possibilities and forget about Gideon.
But that is not what we requested.
You requested a most thorough search. It is in the record. And we have used every means at our disposal to accommodate you.
Your record on the subject is not precise, Your Excellency.
Surely, Mister Spock, you do not intend, I hope, to create a dispute between the Federation and Gideon?
Your Excellency, a dispute is the farthest thing from our minds, and there's no need to check your records. I merely suggest that the language of our statement may not have been understood exactly as intended.
Mister Spock, you're an officer of a spaceship. In your profession, you use many instruments, tools and weapons to achieve your objectives.
True, Your Excellency.
However, the only tool diplomacy has is language.
It is of the utmost importance that the meaning be crystal clear.
Your Excellency, I am basically a scientist. Clarity of formulation is essential in my profession also.
I'm glad to hear it. Perhaps you could then make greater effort to choose your words more precisely.
Are you going to let him get away with that?
No matter what you say, Mister Spock, he'll twist your meaning.
Yes, he's infuriating, sir. How can you stand it?
We do not leave without being absolutely sure ourselves that everything has been done.
Now certainly you understand our feelings about that.
Mister Spock! Mister Spock!
Yes, Your Excellency.
Are you still there?
Yes, Your Excellency.
There was considerable interference with your transmission. A lot of noise drowned out
What was said. Would you repeat, please?
I apologise for the noise, your Excellency. To summarise, I request permission to transport down to Gideon.
Forgive me, Mister Spock. No criticism of your equipment was intended. But it has sent your captain on some strange journey, a safe one we all still hope.
But it could create for us serious incidents with your Federation, and now you propose to
Repeat this disaster with another officer? This would be madness.
I'll not take that, Mister Spock. That transporter was in perfect condition. I guarantee that myself. Transport me down right this minute, and I'll prove to those gentlemen.
Mister Scott, you'll go to the transporter room and await my orders.
Aye, Mister Spock.
I could not quite make that out, Mister Spock.
Would you be so good as to repeat what you said?
Yes, Your Excellency. The ship's engineer was explaining that the malfunction, which did exist, has now been repaired. We would appreciate an opportunity to test the equipment. I, therefore, request permission
To beam down to your council chamber.
But, Mister Spock, you
Your Excellency, grant this one request.
You are a very persistent fellow, Mister Spock. Very well, then, You shall test the skill of your very excitable
Repairman.
There is one proviso. We cannot risk further incidents. You will therefore transport a member of my staff to your ship. Let us first see if that works.
Thank you, Your Excellency. Your proposal is accepted. Mister Scott.
Scott here.
Prepare to beam aboard a representative of the Gideon council.
Aye, aye, sir.
My assistant will provide you with the proper, what is the word?
Co-ordinates.
Thank you. Proceed, Krodak.
(standing) Eight seven five.
Eight seven five.
Zero two zero.
Zero two zero.
Seven zero nine.
Seven zero nine. Energising.
Mister Spock, the gentleman from Gideon is here.
Your Excellency, your assistant has arrived safely, and I am now ready to transport down to Gideon.
Now, now, not so fast, Mister Spock. That is quite a different matter. We agreed to allow one representative on our soil, your captain.
Sir, our captain is still missing, and I now demand that I be allowed to transport to Gideon as we agreed.
Forgive me, Mister Spock, but I overstepped my authority when I made that agreement. However, your request will be taken up at the next full session of Gideon's council.
Mister Scott, beam down the gentleman from Gideon.
Just when I was beginning to think you might find a whole new career as a diplomat, Mister Spock.
Do not give up hope. Lieutenant Uhura, contact Starfleet Command. Demand an immediate reply to our request for permission to beam down to Gideon.
Yes, Mister Spock. Enterprise to Starfleet Command. Enterprise to Starfleet Command.
Enterprise to Starfleet Command. Enterprise to Starfleet Command. Captain Kirk here. Red priority. Red priority.
Isn't it in working order?
It seems to be.
Then someone should have heard you.
Captain Kirk here. Please answer red priority. Please answer red priority. Well, if someone is listening, they're not answering.
Why should they do that?
They wouldn't.
What did you do?
Took the ship out of warp speed.
Out of what?
Space terminology. We're no longer moving faster than the speed of light. I've trimmed down to sublight speed until we find out where we are.
It feels the same.
Of course it does. Maybe it is the same.
Well, has the ship slowed down?
(referring to viewscreen) If you believe that, we have.
Oh, please! Don't tell me the sky is out of order now. It's so quiet. So peaceful.
It isn't really, you know.
And it's beautiful.
Yes. Yes, it is. Very, very beautiful.
And we're alone. Can you make it last a long, long time?
How long would you like it to last?
Forever.
Well, let's see. Power, that's no problem, it regenerates. And food. We have enough to feed a crew of four hundred and thirty for five years. So that should last us
Forever. All my life I've dreamed of being alone.
Most people are afraid of being alone.
Where I come from, people dream of it.
Why? Why are the people of Gideon like that?
Gideon? I told you, I don't know where I come from, what my planet is.
It might be Gideon.
Does it matter so much?
Yes. It might help me pinpoint our location.
And then you might find your crew. Being here with you, I forgot there must be others. I envy you your sense of loyalty. I want to ease your feeling of dread, your fear that all your crew no longer exists.
I've got to contact whoever is manipulating us. There must be a way. Odona. Odona, can you remember why your people dream of being alone?
Because they never can be.
Why? What makes it so impossible to be alone?
Because there are so many of us. So many. There is no place, no street, no house, no garden, no beach, no mountain that is not filled with people. Each one of us would kill in order to find a place alone to himself. They would willingly die for it, if they could.
Who sent you here?
No one commands Odona. I was not sent here.
You've come to kill. Odona, have you come to die?
I don't know. I don't care. I only know I'm here. I only know I'm happy.
Now, all I have to do is find a medical kit, and I can completely cure this. (his arm)
Cure?
Yes, the irritation would be gone.
What will happen if you do not find one? Will you become sick and die?
No. Over something as simple as this? No, it'll cure itself eventually, but. Do you know, uh I don't even remember how this happened. Do you hear that?
Yes, it sounds like an engine.
No, the ship's engines don't make that kind of sound.
But there is something wrong with the equipment. Could that be it?
I know every sound that this ship might make. That's coming from outside.
A storm might
A storm might, but you wouldn't be able to hear it. Come on.
This is a viewing port. We'll be able to see outside. If there's a storm, we'll be able to see it.
If it works.
People. The faces of people. And then the stars. What's happening? What's out there? The sound is gone.
It was like the heartbeat of all those people, and thousands upon thousands more pressing against the ship.
But you said we were moving through space.
Yes, I said that.
Then the people can't be out there.
Yes, they can.
Please don't frighten me.
It could be a mirage. They could exist in our minds.
You mean that we're going mad.
Or some power is creating the illusion in our minds that we are somewhere near your planet. But why?
I don't know. I don't know.
I think I have an idea. So that we won't keep trying to find out where we are, that we'll be content to stay here.
Oh, be content!
Be content? Be content? Not until I find out what happened to my crew. Are they dead?
I don't know.
Did you kill them so you could have the ship to yourself?
Captain.
Captain, something's happening to me. I never felt like this before.
I've never felt like this before either.
Is this the way one looks when one is developing a sickness?
There's no sickness on your planet, remember?
Now there will be. There will be sickness. There will be death.
Hodin.
Yes, Captain Kirk. Our experiment has passed the first stage.
Let me in there. I can help her.
We have no need of any of your medicines.
But she's ill.
And we're grateful to you for her illness. You have done well, my daughter.
Guard the captain well. We shall need him for a long time.
I sympathize deeply, but Starfleet cannot override Federation directives in this matter.
Admiral, the crew will not understand it.
Has your crew suddenly become interested in provoking a war? That is not Starfleet's mission.
We wish only to save the life of the captain.
You have not proved your case to the Federation, or to Starfleet, for that matter.
I am positive that I can do so to your satisfaction, Admiral. I have been convinced, since my first exchange with the ambassador, that the captain has been taken prisoner.
Granted as fact, Mister Spock. 
I now know where the captain is being held, if he is being held at the same place to which we transported him.
They would not dare harm him in the Gideon council chamber.
Sir, the captain is not being held in the Gideon council chamber. He is being held nearby.
You have answered what and where. I'm waiting for your explanation of why.
Since the planet is shielded from our sensors, we cannot establish that without on the spot investigation.
Do you have evidence the captain's life is threatened? Permission denied.
Admiral, I wish to state for the record that your decision is completely arbitrary.
So noted.
Will it last long?
That depends on the strength of the one infected. You have great strength.
How will you know when I am to die?
Your body temperature will be very great. You will see us, but you will not know who we are.
I must see him before then, Father.
Rest. Now lie still. Do you feel great pain?
Yes, in my arms and thighs.
What is it like to feel pain?
It is like, like when you see the people have no hope for happiness, Father. You feel great despair, and your heart is heavy because you know you can do nothing. Pain is like that.
Your courage gives me great pride.
Let me see her.
Not yet.
You don't know what she may have.
But we do. She has Vegan choriomeningitis.
It's very rare, and always fatal if not treated within twenty four hours. I know, it almost killed me.
Yes. Our prime minister learned about you during our negotiations. That's why we brought you here. Your blood provided the micro-organisms which infected her.
That's how my arm got hurt.
Yes. As Odona told you, we have no need for medical practitioners here. Our apologies. We were unforgivably awkward to have hurt you.
You're mad.
No. We are desperate.
I don't understand how Starfleet can deny permission to beam down to search for the captain.
They did not ask for our understanding, Doctor.
I don't see how they expect us to sit here and wait for the captain to reappear.
Unfortunately, I must violate a direct order from Starfleet.
That's the best possible decision you could make, Spock. I'm with you.
I do not make it lightly, Doctor. However, Command knows that Ambassador Hodin has not been totally honest with us. Lieutenant Uhura, repeat original Gideon co-ordinates for beam down.
Eight seven five, zero two zero, zero seven nine.
Mister Scott, the co-ordinates given you?
Eight seven five, zero two zero, seven zero nine.
Co-ordinates don't match.
Precisely. I shall beam down at once. Mister Scott, you have the conn.
I'll pick up my medical tricorder and meet you in the transporter room.
Negative, Doctor. I cannot accept the responsibility for ordering a fellow officer to violate a Starfleet directive. I can make such a decision only for myself.
I'm not asking you to make the decision for me.
The situation forces me to do so, Doctor.
In that case, it's the worst possible decision you can make, Spock.
This will not take long.
Isn't that just about what Captain Kirk said before he left?
(into intercom) Captain Kirk. Spock here. Captain Kirk?
Your report to the Federation was a tissue of lies. You described environmental, physical, cultural conditions that would make Gideon a paradise.
And so it was! A long, long time ago what we described was true! The atmosphere on Gideon has always been germ-free. And the people flourished in their physical and spiritual perfection. Eventually, even the life span increased. Death became almost unknown to us. It occurred only when the body could no longer regenerate itself, and that happens now only to the very old.
Those are conditions most people would envy.
But Gideon did not find it enviable. The birth rate continued to rise, and the population grew, until now Gideon is encased in a living mass who can find no rest, no peace, no joy.
Then why haven't you introduced any of the new techniques to sterilise men and women?
Every organ renews itself. It would be impossible.
Then let your people learn about the devices to safely prevent conception. The Federation will provide anything you need.
But you see, the people of Gideon have always believed that life is sacred. That the love of life is the greatest gift. That is the one unshakable truth of Gideon. And this overwhelming love of life has developed our regenerative capacity and our great longevity.
And the great misery which you now face.
That is bitterly true, Captain. Nevertheless, we cannot deny the truth which shaped our evolution. We are incapable of destroying or interfering with the creation of that which we love so deeply. Life, in every form, from foetus to developed being. It is against our tradition, against our very nature. We simply could not do it.
Yet you can kill a young girl.
We're trying to re-adjust the life cycle of an entire civilisation.
You're killing your own daughter. How can you do that?
My daughter hoped to make you feel the agony of Gideon. But it was impossible. No stranger could realize the horror that life can be here. I will not beg for your understanding of my personal grief, nor will I parade it for you to gain your co-operation. My love for my daughter is too deep for display. My pride in her runs even deeper. My daughter freely chose to do what she is doing, as the people of Gideon are free to choose.
The virus you need is very rare. Who will provide it?
You will stay. Your blood will provide it.
No sir, not me. You have many methods available. I've mentioned only a few. I do not offer my life for this purpose. I have many plans, and I have hopes other than death for Odona.
My daughter pleaded with you to stay.
What was said and what happened between us was for us alone.
She hoped you would love her and wish to stay.
So that was your plan. That I would fall so under her spell that I would give up my freedom and become a willing sacrifice.
Stay with us. We're desperate.
Odona's fever is rising. She's calling the name of James Kirk.
You see, you cannot leave us now. Go to her.
An exact duplicate of the Enterprise. But completely inoperative. (into communicator) Spock to Enterprise. Spock to Enterprise.
Scott here, Mister Spock.
I am speaking to you from the bridge of the Enterprise.
You're where?
On the bridge of the Enterprise, Mister Scott.
Those were the co-ordinates you insisted on.
And they were correct. I'm on board an exact duplicate of the Enterprise.
An exact duplicate of the Enterprise? Is it in orbit, Mister Spock?
In orbit, Doctor. In a manner of speaking, Gideon is in orbit and the ship is on Gideon.
Well, that's a beginning, but what about the captain?
I'm sure he's on board somewhere. I'm picking up life readings. Spock out.
If you don't allow me to bring Doctor McCoy down here, it'll soon be too late to do anything for her.
We have told you, it is her wish and mine that there be no interference with the natural progress of the virus.
Her death is unnecessary. Even if she lives, her blood will provide the same serum you need as mine would.
No, her death at so young an age will let the people know for certain that our lifecycle can be changed. It's the symbol that'll bring forth the dedicated young volunteers. The serum in their new blood will change Gideon, and it will once more be the paradise it was.
I'm glad that you are here. Is the time short?
Very short.
And I asked you to make our journey last forever. Oh. It began here.
And it can continue. If only you'll allow me, I can cure you.
I'm not afraid of what will happen, but it's just that now I wish with all my heart to stay with you forever.
Your Excellency. Captain, you're looking well. Evidently Starfleet's analysis was correct.
Mister Spock, we have a patient for Doctor McCoy. Have Scotty beam us up.
Spock to Enterprise. Spock to Enterprise.
Scott here.
Three to beam up, Mister Scott.
Same co-ordinates?
Negative. Lock in on my communicator signal. Your Excellency, please do not interfere. I already have one serious problem to resolve with upper echelons.
Well, that was close, but you made it.
I am cured?
Right. Just like the captain.
Instead of smiling at me, you should be shouting in anger.
Why, because you're well again?
No. Because I pretended to be (pause) How can you bear to look at me after the way I deceived you?
At least you owe me the privilege of letting me look at you.
You are a gentleman, Captain Kirk.
Thank you, ma'am.
You are no longer needed on Gideon. I can take your place there.
Is that what you want to do?
That is what I must do. I am needed there now.
You're needed everywhere, Odona.
It is not like our ship.
Oh, yes, it is. It's exactly the same. Only this one works.
It goes to many other planets?
Yes, it goes to the whole galaxy. With another difference. This one is crowded.
It seems crowded to you?
It does now.
Are you going to stay on the ship?
Yes, Odona, I have to.
As crowded as my planet is, I could wish for it to hold one more person.
(into intercom) Kirk to transporter control. One to beam down to the planet Gideon.
I will miss you, Captain James Kirk.
That Which Survives
A ghost planet?
I suggest no supernatural explanation, Captain. I merely point out that the facts do not fit any known categories of planets.
Let's take the facts one by one. That should explain something.
Undoubtedly. The age of this planet would seem to be only a few thousand years. It would be impossible for vegetation to evolve in so short a period.
Its size is approximately that of Earth's moon.
But its mass and atmosphere are similar to Earth.
That would be difficult to explain.
It would be impossible, Captain. An atmosphere could not evolve in so short a period of time.
And yet it has.
Evidently. But the inconsistencies are so compounded as to present a seemingly impossible phenomenon.
But a fascinating one, Mister Spock.
Precisely, Captain.
It would bear closer investigation, it would seem, if we're to provide Starfleet with an accurate report. Lieutenant, send Doctor McCoy to the transporter room for survey party. We'll also need Senior Geologist D'Amato.
Aye, aye, sir.
Feed beam down co-ordinates to the transporter room. Mister Sulu, you'll accompany me. Mister Spock, you have the conn.
Lieutenant Rahda, report to the bridge immediately.
This expedition should be a geologist's dream, Mister D'Amato.
Yes. If Mister Spock is correct, you'll have a report to startle the Fifth Interstellar Geophysical Conference.
Why? What is it, Jim?
A planet that even Spock can't explain. Prepare to transport. Energise.
Wait! You must not go!
Jim, did you see what I saw?
That woman attacked Ensign Wyatt.
Mister Spock! Are you all right?
Yes. I believe no permanent damage was done.
What happened?
The occipital area of my head seems to have impacted with the chair.
No, Mister Spock. I meant what happened to us?
That we have yet to ascertain.
(a woman in yellow uniform) Mister Spock. The planet's gone!
What kind of earthquakes do they have in this place?
I don't know. Any more like that and they'll tear this planet apart.
Could seismic stress have accounted for it?
That's very strange. And that woman. Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise, come in. The shock may have damaged it.
It's gone! The Enterprise, it's gone!
How could it be gone? What the devil does that mean, Jim?
For one thing it means we're stranded.
The Enterprise must have blown up. That would explain the high radiation readings, wouldn't it, Captain? If the matter - antimatter engines
Shall we stop guessing, Mister Sulu, and try and establish a pattern? I get no readings of high energy concentration. If the Enterprise had blown up, it would have left a high residual radiation.
Could it be the Enterprise hit the planet?
Once in Siberia there was a meteor so great that it flattened whole forests and was felt as far away as
Mister Sulu, if I'd wanted a Russian history lesson, I'd have brought along Mister Chekov. This is a matter of survival, gentlemen. Without the Enterprise, we need food, and we need water, and we need them fast. I want a detailed analysis made of this planet, and I want it now.
Aye, sir.
Mister Sulu.
Engineering, no damage. All power levels normal.
Damage control report. Ship functioning normally. Many bumps and bruises. One casualty, Mister Spock. The transporter officer, he's dead.
Report on the death of the transporter officer.
Give me a full report as soon as possible, please. Spock out. Mister Scott, have the transporter checked for possible malfunction.
Aye, sir.
No debris of any kind, sir. I've made two full scans. If the planet had broken up, there'd be some sign. But what bothers me is the stars, Mister Spock.
The stars.
Yes, sir. They're wrong.
Wrong?
Yes, Mister Spock. Look. Now here's a replay of the star pattern just before the explosion.
A positional change.
It doesn't make any sense. But somehow I'd say that in a flash we've been knocked one thousand light years away from where we were.
Nine hundred and ninety point seven light years to be exact, Lieutenant.
But that's not possible. Nothing can do that.
Mister Scott, since we are here, your statement is not only illogical but also unworthy of refutation. It is also illogical to assume that any explosion, even that of a small star going supernova, could have hurled us a distance of nine hundred and ninety point seven light years.
The point is, it shouldn't have hurled us anywhere. Why, it should have destroyed us immediately, vaporised us.
That is correct, Mister Scott, by all the laws that we know. There was no period of unconsciousness. Our ship's chronometers registered a matter of only a few seconds. Therefore, we were displaced through space in some manner which I am unable to fathom.
What you're saying is that the planet didn't blow up, and the captain and the others, they're still alive!
Please, Mister Scott, restrain your leaps of illogic. I have said nothing. I was merely speculating.
Spock here.
Explain.
Would any known disease organism do that?
Please keep me fully advised. Spock out. He was in the transporter room. Someone may have entered after Captain Kirk and his party left. Mister Scott, since the Enterprise is obviously functional, I suggest we return to our starting place at top warp speed.
Aye, sir. But even at that it'll take a while to get there.
In that case, Mister Scott, I suggest we start at once. Can you give me warp eight?
Aye, sir. And maybe a wee bit more. I'll sit on the warp engines myself and nurse them.
That position, Mister Scott, would not only be unavailing but also undignified. Lieutenant Rahda, plot a course.
Already plotted and laid in, sir.
Good. Then prepare to come to warp eight.
Your report covers all vegetation?
Yes, Captain. All vegetation is inedible. Poison to us.
If the Enterprise has been destroyed, you know how long we can survive.
Yes. I don't see any water, but there must be some to grow the vegetation. A source of water would stretch our survival. Did you see any evidence of rainfall?
But there is earth-type vegetation.
Is it possible the vegetation could absorb the water directly from the air?
Yes, that's possible. There's also the possibility of underground water.
Sulu's picked up an organism that's almost a virus, like a a plant parasite. It's the nearest biological form of life I can find.
This apparently is going to be our home for as long as we last. I suggest we find out as much as we can about it. Split up. D'Amato, see if you can find underground water.
Sulu, run an atmospheric analysis.
Aye, sir.
Bones, see if you can find out anything about the vegetation and your parasite. How do they get their moisture? If you can discover how they survive, maybe we can.
Sulu to Captain.
Kirk here.
Captain, I was making a standard magnetic sweep. From zero, I suddenly got a reading that was off the scale. Then, a reverse of polarity and now I get nothing. I've never seen anything like this reading. Like a door opened and then closed again.
Kirk out.
Do not be afraid.
I know. You are Lieutenant D'Amato, Senior Geologist.
From the spaceship Enterprise.
Do not be afraid.
I am for you, Lieutenant D'Amato.
I am only for D'Amato.
Do not call the others. Please.
McCoy to Kirk.
Kirk here.
Jim, I just got a life form reading of tremendous intensity. Suddenly it was just there.
What do you mean just there?
Just that. All levels were normal, then I get this biological surge of life form registering. No, now it's gone. 
As though a door opened and closed.
Yes.
What direction?
Zero eight three.
Hang on. D'Amato's section. Come in. Kirk to D'Amato. Come in. Come in. Bones, Sulu, D'Amato doesn't answer.
I'll be right there.
Bones!
Jim, every cell in his body's been disrupted.
Jim, what are you doing?
Digging a grave.
Poor D'Amato. What a terrible way to die.
There are no good ways, Sulu.
That's the same red rock.
My phaser didn't cut through it.
Whatever it is, it has a mighty high melting point.
Eight thousand degrees centigrade. It looks like igneous rock, but infinitely denser.
This whole planet must be made up of this substance, covered over by top soil.
Mister Sulu, it might explain this place a little better if we knew what the substance is. I know it was D'Amato's field, but see what you can find out.
Yes, sir.
Well, I guess a tomb of rocks is the best we can provide for D'Amato.
Yeah. It might be the most suitable memorial at that.
I wonder what killed him.
I don't know, but something or someone did.
We're holding warp eight point four, sir. If we can maintain it, our estimated time of arrival is eleven and one half solar hours.
Eleven point three three seven hours, Lieutenant. I wish you would be more precise.
Scott to Bridge. Scott to Bridge.
Spock here.
Mister Spock, the ship feels wrong.
Feels, Mister Scott?
I know it doesn't make sense. Instrumentation reads correct, but the feel is wrong.
It's something I can't quite put into words.
That is obvious, Mister Scott. I suggest you avoid emotionalism and simply keep your instruments correct.
Spock out.
It looks so lonely there.
It would be worse if he had company.
Doctor, how can you joke about it?
I'm not joking. Until we know what killed him, none of us are safe.
We've got to figure this out and devise a defence against it. Is it possible that the rocks have life?
You remember on Janus Six, the silicon creatures
But our instruments recorded that. They were life forms. They registered as life forms.
Unless we're dealing with beings, intelligent beings who can shield themselves.
Beings intelligent enough to have destroyed the Enterprise?
That's the problem, Sulu. We have only questions. No answers.
Watkins, check the bypass valve on the matter/antimatter reaction chamber. Make sure it's not overheating.
But, Mister Scott, the board shows correct.
I didn't ask you to check the board, lad.
Yes, sir.
Who are you?
My name is not important. Yours is Watkins, John B. Engineer Grade four.
You know all about me. I've never seen you before.
Show me this unit. I wish to learn.
This is the matter-antimatter integrator control. That's the cut off switch.
Not correct. That is the emergency overload bypass, which engages almost instantaneously. A wise precaution, considering it takes the antimatter longer to explode once the magnetic flow fails. I am for you, Mister Watkins.
Mister Scott, there's a strange woman who knows the entire plan of the Enterprise.
Oh, you poor lad. Scott to bridge. Scott to bridge.
Spock here.
My assistant, Watkins, is dead.
Do you know what he died of, Mister Scott?
I didn't see it happen, but his last words were a warning cry about some strange woman.
Security alert, all decks. Female intruder, extremely dangerous. Security alert. All decks.
The basic substance of this planet is an alloy of diburnium-osmium. It couldn't have evolved naturally.
Captain, it doesn't make sense. In fact, nothing about this planet makes sense.
Except for a momentary fluctuation on your instruments, this planet has no magnetic field. The apparent age of these rocks is only a few thousand years. No known process could evolve the plant life they have here in that short space of time.
Are you suggesting this might be an artificial planet?
But Captain, where are the people who made it? Why can't we see them?
The planet might be hollow. They might be shielding themselves from our sensor probes. It's dark. Let's get some rest. Tomorrow we have to find some food and some water or it's going to be a very unpleasant stay.
While it lasts.
I'll take the first watch, sir.
All right. Take D'Amato's tricorder. Set it for automatic distress. You never can tell.
Aye, sir.
Spock to Sickbay. Have you completed the autopsy on Watkins, Doctor?
Was the cause of his death the same as that which killed the transporter officer?
My guess, Doctor, would be valueless. I suggest we refrain from guessing and find some facts.
Spock out.
The power of this intruder to disrupt every cell in a body, combined with the almost inconceivable power required to hurl the Enterprise such a distance, speak of a very high culture and a very great danger.
You mean that one of the people who threw us a thousand light years away from that planet is on board and killing our people?
A reasonable assumption, Mister Scott.
Then you're right, Mister Spock. Watkins must've been murdered. I sent him in to check the matter-antimatter reactor. There are no exposed circuits there. It couldn't have been anything he touched.
If there are more of those beings on that planet, the captain and the others are in very great danger.
I am unarmed.
Who are you?
That is not important. You are Lieutenant Sulu. You were born on the planet Earth. You're helmsman for the Enterprise.
How do you know this? Where did you get this information? Are you from this planet?
I am from here.
Then the planet is hollow. Who killed Lieutenant D'Amato? All right. The captain will want to talk to you. That way. Move!
You do not understand. I have come for you.
What do you want?
I want to touch you.
You were on the Enterprise. Keep back! Stop or I'll shoot! I don't want to have to kill a woman.
Captain Kirk! Captain Kirk!
Hold it! Who are you?
I am for him. I am for Lieutenant Sulu.
Don't let her touch you, Captain! That's how D'Amato died. Phasers won't stop her.
I am for Lieutenant Sulu. Please, I must touch him.
How can you destroy others and not me?
I don't want to destroy. I don't want to.
Who are you? Why are you trying to kill us?
Only Sulu. I mean you no harm.
Are there men on this planet?
Please, I must touch him. I am for Lieutenant Sulu.
No!
Bones, did you see that? Maybe Spock was wrong. Perhaps this is a ghost planet.
Well, all I know is she almost made a ghost out of Sulu. His shoulder, where she touched it, every cell's been disrupted. Exploded from within. If she'd really gotten a good grip on him, Jim.
How can such people be, Captain? Such evil and she's so, so beautiful.
Yes, I know.
Security sweeps of all decks are negative, Mister Spock. No evidence of intruder.
Very well. Cancel Red Alert but maintain increased security.
Aye, sir. All decks, cancel Red Alert. Maintain increased security.
Please update our subspace report to Starfleet to include security search, results negative.
How did she get off the ship, sir?
Presumably the same way she got on.
Yes, sir. Mister Spock what are the chances of the captain and the others being alive?
Lieutenant, we are not engaged in gambling. We are proceeding in the only logical way to return to the place they were last seen, and factually ascertain whether or not they still live.
Yes, Mister Spock.
Mister Spock, speed is increased to warp eight point eight.
Bridge to Engineering.
Scotty here. I see it.
It's a power surge. I'm working on it. Reduce speed until I locate the trouble.
Very well. Reduce speed to warp seven.
Aye, sir. Warp seven. Mister Spock, our speed has increased to warp eight point nine and still climbing.
Bridge to Engineering. Negative effect on power reduction. Speed is still increasing.
Aye, Mister Spock, and I found out why. The emergency bypass control of the matter-antimatter integrator is fused.
It's completely useless. The engines are running wild. There's no way to get at them. We should reach maximum overload in about fifteen minutes.
I would calculate fourteen point eight seven minutes, Mister Scott.
Those few seconds will not make any difference, Mister Spock, because you and I and the rest of the crew will no longer be here to bandy it back and forth.
This thing is going to blow up
And there's nothing in the universe can stop it.
There's a layer of necrotic tissue a few cells thick. A normal wound would heal quickly.
She just touched me. How could it happen so fast?
That's a good question. She touched the transporter chief. He collapsed immediately. She apparently got to D'Amato. We saw what happened to him. The question is, why are you alive?
Captain, I'm happy the way it turned out.
Jim, what kind of power must she have?
The power to totally disrupt biological cell structure. Sulu's alive because I intervened. But that raises an even worse question.
Yes. Why didn't she kill you?
She's not through yet.
It's useless. And there's no question it's deliberate.
Sabotage.
Aye, and a thorough job. The system's foolproof. Whoever murdered Watkins sabotaged this.
You said it was fused. How?
That's what worries me.
Worries, Mister Scott?
Well, it's fused, all right, but it would take all the power of our main phaser banks to do it.
Interesting.
I find nothing interesting in the fact that we're about to blow up.
No, but the method is fascinating.
Whatever did this is still aboard this ship. I fail to understand why you cancelled the security alert.
A force that could hurl us nine hundred and ninety point seven light years away and at that distance still be able to sabotage our main source of energy will not be waiting around to be taken into custody.
Aye.
As I recall the pattern of our fuel flow, there is an access tube leading to the matter-antimatter reaction chamber.
There's a service crawlway, but it's not meant to be used while the integrator operates.
Still, it is there, and it might be possible to shut off the fuel at that point.
What with? Bare hands?
A magnetic probe.
Any matter that comes in contact with antimatter triggers the explosion. And I'm not even sure a man can live in the crawlway in the energy stream of the magnetic field that bottles up the antimatter.
I shall try.
You'll be killed, man!
Unless a solution is found quickly, that fate awaits all of us.
Aye. You're right. What have we got to lose? But I'll do it, Mister Spock. I know every millimetre of that system. I'll do whatever has to be done.
Very well, Mister Scott. You spoke of the feel of the ship being wrong.
Aye. It was an emotional statement. I don't expect you to understand it.
I note it, Mister Scott, without necessarily understanding it. I propose to run an analysis through the ship's computers, comparing the present condition of the Enterprise with her ideal condition.
Mister Spock, we don't have time for that.
We have twelve minutes and twenty seven seconds. I suggest you do whatever you can in the service crawlway, while I make the computer study.
Lieutenant Sulu, do you feel strong enough to move about?
I feel fine, Captain.
Is he, Bones?
He's in fair shape.
All right. Whatever destructive power this woman has seems to be aimed at one specific person at one specific time. If I'm correct, when she re-appears, the other two might protect the one she's after by interposing their bodies. No weapons seem to affect her.
But Captain, how does she know about us? Does she read our minds? (there's a whining sound) Phaser on overload!
Controls are fused. Drop!
Apparently she can destroy our weapons as well as destroy us. Come on, let's go.
All right, lads. Get the crawlway door open. Hand me the tools. Communicator. All right. Head first. I hope Mister Spock knows what he's doing.
Scott to Bridge.
Go ahead, Mister Scott.
I've sealed off the aft end of the service crawlway, and I've positioned explosive separator charges to blast me clear of the ship if I rupture the magnetic bottle. I'm so close to the flow now it feels like ants crawling all over my body.
Mister Scott, I suggest you refrain from any further subjective descriptions. You now have ten minutes and nineteen seconds in which to perform your task.
Mister Spock, we're at warp eleven point two and accelerating.
I heard that. The ship's not structured to take that speed for any length of time.
You now have ten minutes and ten seconds.
All right, Mister Spock. I'm starting to open the access panel now.
Access to the flow itself.
If the magnetic flow jumps, you must jettison me. The safety control
Will not hold more than two seconds if I rupture the field.
I'm aware of these facts. Please get on with the job. Computer.
Working.
Analysis on my comparison co-ordinates.
Unable to comply. Comparison co-ordinates too complex for immediate readout. Will advise upon completion.
I've removed the access plate, and I've got static electric charges dancing on the instruments. Looks like an aurora borealis in there.
Lieutenant Uhura, you are monitoring the magnetic force?
Oh yes, sir.
Please do not take your eyes off of it. Lieutenant Rahda, arm the pod jettison system.
Aye, sir. I'll jettison the pod at the first sign of trouble.
Not until my order.
Yes, sir. Warp eleven point nine.
Mister Scott, what is your situation?
It's hard to see. There's so much disturbance that any attempt to get at the flow would rupture the magnetic field.
You have eight minutes, forty one seconds.
I know what time it is. I don't need a blooming' cuckoo clock.
Captain, I'm getting that strange magnetic sweep again, from zero to off the scale.
Yes. Like a door opening.
Who have you come for this time?
For you, James T. Kirk. Commander of the Enterprise.
Keep behind us, Jim.
Why do you want to kill us?
For defence. You are Captain James T. Kirk, commander of the Enterprise.
Then why do you want to kill me?
You are an invader.
We're here on a peaceful mission. It's you who have killed our people. We mean no harm to you. We want to leave, peacefully.
Captain, I'm getting no life form register.
An android?
That would give a mechanical reading. I'm getting nothing.
Who are you?
I am Losira, Commander.
Commander of what?
Of this station.
Station? Station? Where? How do you feel about killing me?
Feel? Killing is wrong.
Stay between us.
You must not penetrate this station. Please, I must touch you.
You want to kill me?
No.
Then why do it if you don't want to?
I am sent.
By whom?
We defend this place.
Are there others on this planet?
They are no more.
How long have you been alone? Are you lonely?
She must be somewhere.
She's not registering.
And there's this power surge, right off the scale. Like a door closing. It must be near here.
Is the power level still holding, Jim?
Right off the scale. It's remained at a peak ever since she disappeared. The entrance is here.
You think we're being invited in?
It certainly looks like it. And the invitation doesn't exactly relax me.
I'd rather be on the Enterprise, sir.
I agree.
We've been led here. Why?
I don't know. But whatever civilisation exists on this planet is in there. And without the Enterprise, gentlemen, the only source of food and water is in there. Let's go.
Computer read-out.
Comparison analysis complete.
Continue.
Transporter factor M7 reassembled outphase point zero zero zero nine.
Fifty seven seconds to go.
Understood.
Mister Spock.
Spock here.
I'm going to try to cut through the magnetic flow. But if the probe doesn't precisely match the magnetic flow, there'll be an explosion. Starting right now.
Magnetic force indicator jumping, Mister Spock.
Mister Scott, ease off.
Magnetic force has dropped to normal, sir.
Warp thirteen point two, sir.
Computer, for outphase condition, will reverse field achieve closure?
Affirmative, if M7 factor maintained.
Mister Scott
Reverse polarity on your magnetic probe.
Reverse polarity?
That is correct, Mister Scott.
That'll take some doing. What purpose could it
Please commence. I'll explain.
You were correct in your feel. The Enterprise was put through a molecular transporter and reassembled slightly out of phase. Reverse polarity should seal the incision.
I have no time for theory. I just hope you're right.
Twenty seconds, Mister Spock.
I'm doing the best I can! Wait! It's stuck! It's stuck! Push the button!
Please continue, Mister Scott.
Don't be a fool! Push the button! It's your last chance! Don't be sentimental, push it. I'm going to die anyway.
Please continue.
It's loose! But there's no time. Push the button!
Nine seconds.
Eight seconds, seven seconds
Six seconds, five seconds, four seconds, three seconds, two seconds.
One. Mister Spock, now. Warp fourteen point one. Warp fourteen.
Magnetic forces steady.
Warp thirteen point nine and dropping.
Mister Scott, you have accomplished your task.
You might at least say thank you.
For what purpose, Mister Scott?
What is it in you humans
Never mind.
That requires an overwhelming display of emotion in a situation such as this? Two men pursue the only reasonable course of action indicated, and yet you
Feel that something else is necessary.
Who have you come for? Form a circle. You see? You'd better tell us. Tell us. Who have you come for? Who have you come for? You're a very determined woman. For me?
I am for James T. Kirk.
Gentlemen, I need your help.
Please. I must touch you. I beg it. It is my existence.
We've seen the results of your touch.
But you are my match, James Kirk. I must touch you. Then I will live as one, even to the structure of your cells, the arrangement of chromosomes.
That is how you kill. You'll never reach me.
Watch out!
That computer must be programming these replicas.
The women match our chromosome patterns after they touch us.
It's a very painful affair. I can tell you.
Shift positions.
Captain, we can no longer protect each other.
Spock, the computer! Destroy it!
Mister Spock, I certainly am glad to see you. I thought you and the Enterprise had been destroyed.
I had the same misgivings about you. We returned and picked up your life form readings only a moment ago.
Returned from where?
From where this brain had the power to send the Enterprise. Nine hundred and ninety point seven light years across the galaxy. What a remarkable culture this is.
Was, Mister Spock. Its defences were run by computer.
I surmised that, Captain. Its moves were immensely logical. But what people created this? Are there any representatives here?
There were replicas of one of them. But that power to recreate them has been destroyed.
That is a loss, Captain.
Well, you wouldn't have thought so, Mister Spock, if you'd been among us.
My fellow Kalandans, welcome. A disease has destroyed us. Beware of it. After your long journey, I'm sorry to give you only a recorded welcome, but we who have guarded the outpost for you will be dead by the time you take possession of this planet. I am the last of our advanced force left alive. Too late the physicians discovered the cause of this sickness that kills us. In creating this planet, we have accidentally produced a deadly organism. I have awaited the regular supply ship from home for medical assistance, but I doubt now whether it will arrive in time. I will set the outpost controls on automatic. The computer will selectively defend against all life forms but our own. My fellow Kalandans, I, Losira, wish you well.
The previous ships probably spread the disease all through their people. The supply ship that she was waiting for never came. All these thousands of years, she's been waiting to greet people who were dead.
To do the job of defence, the computer projected a replica of the only image available. Losira's.
The computer was too perfect. It projected so much of Losira's personality into the replica that it felt regret, guilt, at killing. That bought us the time we needed to destroy it. She must have been a remarkable woman.
And beautiful.
Beauty is transitory, Doctor. However, she was evidently highly intelligent.
Kirk to Enterprise. Five to beam up. I don't agree with you, Mister Spock.
Indeed, Captain?
Beauty survives.
The Lights Of Zetar
You're the sanest, the smartest, the nicest woman that has ever come aboard this ship.
Anything else?
Anything else, I'll keep to myself for the moment.
When a man of Scotty's years falls in love, the loneliness of his life is suddenly revealed to him. His whole heart once throbbed only to the ship's engines. He could talk only to the ship. Now he can see nothing but the woman.
I didn't think Mister Scott would go for the brainy type.
I don't think he's even noticed she has a brain.
Mister Scott. Mister Scott?
(turning from Mira) Hmm?
As soon as we're within viewing range of Memory Alpha, you and Lieutenant Romaine will go to the emergency manual monitor. You'll prepare for direct transfer of equipment.
Aye, Captain.
We're ready, sir.
Lieutenant, may I offer my congratulations on what will be your first assignment for the Federation?
Yes. Good luck, Lieutenant.
Thank you.
Captain, I'm picking up a high intensity reading.
Is that Memory Alpha?
No, sir.
Excuse me.
Magnification eight. What is that?
Indications are a storm, Captain, although I've never seen one of such great intensity or strange confirmation.
Readings?
All sensor readings are at maximum calibration.
Captain, it's approaching at warp factor two point six and accelerating.
Check that. No natural phenomena can move faster than the speed of light.
It is definitely doing so, Captain. Therefore it cannot be a phenomenon of nature.
Deflectors on. Condition yellow.
Condition yellow, sir.
Shields activated, Captain.
Mister Sulu, get us the devil out of here! Full scan on the disturbance that penetrated the Bridge. Lieutenant, all decks, damage report.
Mira!
Doctor McCoy to the Bridge. Emergency. Emergency.
Mira! Mira! (her eyes and mouth are open) What's that you're saying'?
Was she hurt by the fall or the action of the disturbance?
I don't know. Did you notice, Scotty?
Well, after the disturbance was over, she just collapsed. How's she doing, Doctor?
Well, I think she's coming around now.
Easy, now. Easy. You had quite a fall.
I'm, I'm fine.
You let me be the judge of that. Do you feel like walking to Sickbay?
I'm fine, Doctor. Really, I am. Is everybody else all right?
Aye, they are. Now you just do what Doctor McCoy ordered.
Why? I feel
Get to Sickbay, Lieutenant. That's an order.
Yes, sir.
Captain, would it be all right if I went along to Sickbay?
No, Mister Scott. Stay at your post for the moment.
But Captain
Lieutenant Uhura. Damage report.
Yes, sir. All stations are operative, sir.
Mister Spock?
Some equipment was temporarily out of order. My sensors were inoperative.
Any damage to the warp engines?
None, Captain.
Good. From the action of that storm, we'll need all the speed we can get.
Captain, it was not a storm.
Captain. During the disturbance, Memory Alpha was hailing. I wanted to respond, but I couldn't make my hand move.
Captain. It was not hands that were paralysed. It was eyes. I could not force my eyes to look down and set a new course.
No, it was speech that was affected. I couldn't utter a sound.
Mister Spock, explanation.
Only of the result, not of the cause. In each case, a different area of the brain was affected. Our voluntary nerve functions were under some form of pressure.
Or attack.
Attack might be a more precise formulation, Captain.
And Lieutenant Romaine seems most susceptible.
Are the readings corresponding, Nurse?
Everything appears normal, Doctor.
Thank you.
What's that you're doing, Nurse?
Recording your responses in this computer.
But why? I haven't had a single response worth noting.
Lieutenant, please.
Well, have l?
Lieutenant, there are four hundred and thirty people aboard this ship. You're the only one that passed out, and I want to know why.
I want to know why too. You're the doctor, you tell me. This is a new experience for me.
This whole thing is a new experience for all of us.
All of you are accustomed to new experiences. It's part of your work. I'm not.
She might have something there, Doctor McCoy. This is her first deep space trip, and you know that affects people.
Well, if we can get on with this, Scotty, we might make that determination. Now then, tell me. What did you feel before you passed out?
Nothing.
Nothing?
Absolutely nothing.
Lieutenant
Doctor, there is nothing more I can tell you.
Lieutenant, you're being completely unco-operative!
Are you putting that into my record? It's not true.
I'll put the facts into your record, if I can get them.
Come on now, Mira. We must help the doctor. Tell us what happened.
Perhaps you can explain to her that any career she hopes for in Starfleet requires discipline and co-operation.
I'm sure that's what the lieutenant wants. She just didn't understand. Did you now, lass?
With a bedside manner like that, Scotty, you're in the wrong business.
When the record of this is forwarded, I'll be sent back, won't I.
Oh, you will not! That's ridiculous. This getting used to space travel, that takes some doing. And not everybody takes to it.
Did you?
Well, me, that's different. I was practically born to it.
I want to continue.
You will. You passed your Starfleet preliminary examinations. And this is just getting used to what you might call your space legs.
I hope that's all it is.
Captain, I've plotted the storm's path.
Main screen projection.
On its present course, it will hit Memory Alpha planetoid as it did us.
Lieutenant, try and warn Memory Alpha of the proximity of that phenomena. Give me an ETA for its possible impact.
I cannot, sir. It has the ability to change speed.
Sir, I'm unable to establish contact with the planetoid. I'm hailing on all frequencies. No response.
It is of little consequence, Captain. Memory Alpha has no protective shields.
No shields?
None, Captain. When the library complex was assembled, shielding was considered inappropriate to its totally academic purpose. Since the information on the Memory planet is available to everyone, special protection was deemed unnecessary.
Wonderful. I hope the storm is aware of that rationale.
Completing approach to planetoid.
It is already over Memory Alpha, Captain! Its speed is incredible. It's hitting the planetoid.
Are we within orbit range, Mister Chekov?
Making final approach.
Lieutenant, try and warn them of
I'm sorry, sir. I can't break through this interference.
Mister Spock, how many people are on Memory Alpha?
It varies with the number of scholars, researchers, and scientists from the various Federation planets who are using the computer complex.
Captain, we are within orbit range.
Lock into orbit.
Aye, sir.
It is leaving Memory Alpha, Captain.
Sensors give no readings of generated energy from Memory Alpha, Captain.
Any life readings?
None.
Let's find out what's going on down there. Kirk to Engineering. Mister Scott, report. Kirk to Engineering. Mister Scott. Where the devil is he? Scotty, report to the Bridge. Report to the Bridge. Have the transporter room stand by. I'm taking a landing party down.
Aye, aye, sir.
Scott here.
Scotty, where've you been? Where are you?
In the Sickbay.
Are you sick?
Och, no. I was just checking on the lass. She's going to be fine now. There's nothing wrong with her.
Well, I'm relieved to hear your prognosis, Mister Scott. Is the doctor there with you, or will I find him in Engineering?
McCoy here, Jim.
Doctor, how's the girl?
I think she's in good shape.
Well, Mister Scott seems to agree with you. The two of you meet me in the transporter room on the double.
Somehow, I find transporting into the darkness unnerving.
Scotty, can you get us some more light?
I'm afraid this light'll have to do, Captain. The generator is inoperative.
Damage report, Spock.
A disaster for the galaxy, Captain. The central brain is damaged. The memory core is burned out. The loss to the galaxy may be irretrievable.
Captain!
A very faint life reading in the immediate vicinity, Captain.
Locate him and keep him alive. We need more information about this enemy.
Over here, Captain!
Bones, can you do something?
Not a thing, Jim. (the woman's mouth is moving) The same garbled sounds Lieutenant Romaine made when she fainted after the storm.
Are you sure?
Absolutely sure.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Sulu here.
Beam down Lieutenant Romaine immediately.
Yes, sir.
Spock, have you seen anything like that before?
Negative.
Bones?
She's dead.
What did she die of?
Severe brain haemorrhaging due to distortion of all neural systems, dissolution of autonomic nervous system. All basic personality factors, Captain.
The attack was thorough.
What did the others die of?
Each had a different centre of brain destroyed, cause unknown.
A different centre of the brain, you say?
Yes, Captain. I can be more detailed when we return to the ship and use the ship's computers.
Mira! The captain has some questions.
Yes, Captain.
Lieutenant, when you were unconscious, you were speaking.
What did I say?
I don't know. The words were unfamiliar to me.
What did it sound like?
They sounded exactly like the last words spoken by the technician.
What technician?
We found one person in there just barely alive. The rest were dead, and we
Lieutenant. Lieutenant.
We must get back to the ship!
Why? Tell me why.
That storm, it's returning.
How do you know?
I know. You'll be killed if we stay.
Lieutenant, I assure you that unexplained phenomenon was headed away from the planet. It is probably seeking other victims.
I tell you t will kill us.
Enterprise to Captain Kirk.
Kirk here.
Bridge, sir. The storm has reappeared on the long range scanner and is closing fast.
What's its course?
Coming back in this direction.
Beam us up.
Mister Sulu, this is the captain. Get the Enterprise out of here.
Wait, Captain. We've lost Mira.
Delay that order, Mister Sulu!
Stabilise her!
Let me.
All right, Mister Sulu, get us out of here. Mister Scott, check emergency manual monitor for transporter control.
Captain, it's changing course.
Plot the new course, Mister Chekov.
Present course is one two six mark twenty.
Plot it.
Mister Spock, you made a statement that phenomenon is not a storm. Explain.
No known conditions in space would support that type of natural phenomenon.
What is it?
I'm having difficulty with the ship's sensors. They seem to be under selective attack by the phenomenon as the unfortunate occupants of Memory Alpha were.
Then deductive reasoning will have to be substituted.
Ship's sensors are operating at the moment. Perhaps the elusive creature will now reveal something about itself.
I saw those men dead, in their exact positions!
Listen to me. I've told you what strange tricks a space trip can play on your mind. Now, that's all it is.
No, Scotty.
Have you ever had visions of the future events before this?
Never.
Well, if you ask me, nobody ever has. That seeing to the future, it's pure bunk. You know that, don't you? 
I've always believed it.
And you were perfectly right.
Then what is it, Scotty? What's frightening me? Ever since that storm hit, I've, I've had such strange thoughts, such feelings of terror.
Space. Space, that's all it is.
Then I don't have to report it?
Well, if you want to spend the rest of the trip in Sickbay. But what good would that do? Doctor McCoy can no more cure it than he can a cold.
Captain, it's heading straight for us.
Activate shields.
Shields activated.
Mister Chekov, change course to one four three mark three.
One four three mark three.
Storm's course, Mister Sulu?
One four three mark three.
Take evasive action.
Evasive action.
Hard starboard, two one seven mark five.
Two one seven mark five. Still with us, sir.
Hard port, one one seven mark two.
One one seven mark two. Still with us, sir!
Is it closing?
Negative, Captain. Maintaining its distance. However, it is matching each manoeuvre we execute, and I am receiving increasing magnitude of energy.
Your analysis, Spock. What is it?
Not what is it, Captain. What are they? There are ten distinct life units within it, all powerfully alive and vital.
Who are they? Where are they from?
Impossible to determine without programming for computer analysis.
It's clear we can't outrun them. Can we shield against them?
I do not believe the Enterprise shields would prove an effective defence.
There must be some defence we can use.
Captain, we are dealing with a community of life units. Their attack is in the form of brain waves directed against the brain, which is most compatible.
Maybe we can avoid another attack. Lieutenant Uhura, open all channels. Tie in the universal translator. Mister Spock says it's alive. Maybe I can talk to it.
All channels open. Translator tied in.
This is Captain James Kirk of the USS Enterprise. We wish you no harm. Physical contact between us is fatal to our life forms. Please, do not come any closer to our ship.
Perhaps it did not understand.
Captain, change in velocity recorded. They are passing our starboard side and manoeuvreing in front of us. Switching to forward scanner. Captain, change in velocity recorded. It has accelerated its approach.
Help, Scotty!
What?
Hold me. It's happening again. No!
Mira.
Perhaps it understands another kind of language. Condition Red Alert. Prepare for phaser firing.
Mira.
No, Scotty. No! No.
Lock in phaser tracking controls.
Adjust phasers to fire across its course. Do not hit it.
Locked in, sir.
Fire. Reaction, Mister Sulu?
None, sir. They're still approaching us.
Apparently a shot across the bow is insufficiently convincing. Prepare to lock phasers into the heart of the community.
Locked in, sir.
Fire.
Scotty!
Mira! Mira.
The phasers seem to have stopped their approach. They're holding position.
Lock in for another blast.
Locked in, sir.
Captain! Captain, the phaser shots, they're killing Mira!
Killing Lieutenant Romaine?
Aye. When you fired the phasers, they stunned her and she crumpled.
Another shot and you'll kill her!
Get her to Sickbay at once.
Ready for firing, Captain.
Cancel that order. Another attack on that alien life form will kill Lieutenant Romaine.
It appears so.
If she is to survive, we can't attack.
Not directly.
Can the computer supply a defence based on the data you've been accumulating?
Negative, Captain. I have not been able to gather sufficient data for that. Captain, there is only one possible defence. If we can find an environment which is deadly to the alien form.
And yet isolate the girl from its deadly effects. Captain Kirk to Doctor McCoy.
Yes, Captain.
Is the girl well enough to be questioned?
I can have her ready in a few minutes.
Have the Lieutenant and Mister Scott in the briefing room as quickly as possible. Bring all available biographical material with you. Kirk out. Mister Spock, come with me.
Go easy on her, Jim. She's in a pretty bad state.
I'll try.
Lieutenant Romaine.
I didn't mean to be unco-operative, Doctor.
Of course you didn't. I told the Captain.
We must get to understand what is happening.
I'll tell you everything I know.
Ship's investigative procedures are sometimes confusing to a new crewman. Don't let us upset you.
I trust all of you implicitly. I want to help.
This investigation has been prompted by two events. First is the time you passed out on the Bridge, and the second is when we fired our main phasers into that force that is attacking us and seriously injured you.
You mustn't worry about hurting me.
Now this is how we'll proceed. Mister Spock has all the information available to us about our attackers. Doctor McCoy has access to Starfleet's exhaustive files on you. A comparison of the two may turn up some improbable connection which may protect you and ourselves. All right, gentlemen? Doctor McCoy, will you proceed?
Romaine, Mira. Lieutenant. Place of birth, Martian Colony Number Three. Parents, Lydia Romaine, deceased. Jacques Romaine, chief engineer, Starfleet, retired.
Mister Spock, are you prepared with the background history of the attackers?
I am, Captain. I have fed all obtainable data to the main computer. It should be ready to supply whatever conclusions are possible.
Thank you. Mister Sulu, what is the status of our friends?
Status unchanged. They're still with us and keeping the same distance.
Continue evasive manoeuvres. Keep me informed. Kirk out. Doctor, do you have a medical record of Lieutenant Romaine available?
Yes, Captain.
I'd like a few items from her psychological profile checked. Any history of psychosomatic illness?
Occasional and teenage routine incidents.
Any evidence of involuntary or unconscious telepathic abilities?
None.
Any pathological or unusual empathic responses?
No, Captain, not empathic. However, an extremely flexible and pliant response to new learning situations is highly marked.
Go ahead, Doctor.
After our phasers hit that thing, I gave Lieutenant Romaine a standard Steinman analysis. The results might be interesting.
Go ahead.
The comparison of our Steinman with Starfleet records shows that Lieutenant Romaine's fingerprints, voice analysis, all external factors remain exactly the same as before. However, according to two hyperencephalograms, her brain wave pattern has been altered.
That's impossible!
That's what I was taught. But the BCP is just as consistent as fingerprints.
Let's see it.
Doctor McCoy, according to your records, Lieutenant Romaine showed no abnormal telepathic powers.
That's right, Spock. But exceptional pliancy was indicated. That might be a factor.
And you are sure that this is the correct slide?
Yes, Mister Spock. That is tape deck D, brain circuitry pattern of Lieutenant Mira Romaine.
Gentlemen, it also happens to be tape H, the impulse tracking obtained from the alien life units.
Nurse Chapel followed this every step of the way. There can be no error.
Check it, Spock.
As I said, Captain, this is the tracking obtained during the last shielded run. Computer, run a detailed comparison brain circuitry patterns, tape D and tape H.
Comparison tape D's brain circuitry patterns of Lieutenant Mira Romaine and tape H, brain circuitry patterns of alien life unit, identical. Identical.
Fascinating.
There has been no error.
Doctor McCoy is correct, Captain. There is an identity of minds taking place between the alien beings and the mind of Lieutenant Romaine. Their thoughts are becoming hers.
Bridge to Captain Kirk.
The alien is no longer maintaining its distance.
Continue evasive action. Keep me informed. Kirk out.
Mira has tried to tell me all along that she was seeing things in advance.
Why didn't you report it?
You don't report space sickness. That's all I thought it was.
What did she see?
The first attack on the ship, the attack on Memory Alpha and the time we nearly lost her.
Those were all acts carried out by our attacker.
And? And?
Yes, Scotty? What else?
I thought for a moment there was something else, but I guess I was wrong.
Was he wrong, Lieutenant?
Yes, there was one other time.
What did you see?
I saw Scotty.
Where?
I don't know.
What was he doing?
He was dying. Now I understand what's been happening. I've been seeing through another mind. I've been flooded with thoughts not my own that control me. Oh, Scotty, Scotty! I'd rather die than hurt you. I'd rather die.
Kirk here.
Sulu, Captain. All evasion tactics carried out as ordered.
What success did you have?
It's been useless, Captain.
At their present force, they will get through the shields this time, Captain.
Warp eight, Mister Sulu.
Yes, sir.
They'll be here very soon. They may destroy you and us as they did Memory Alpha. You are especially susceptible to their will. But we have one chance to survive. Don't resist. Let them begin to function through you. If we can control that moment, we have a chance. Will you try?
Tell me what to do.
Captain Kirk to medical lab.
Medical lab here, sir.
Prepare the antigrav test units. Let's go.
Attention. All personnel, attention. Alien force has penetrated the ship.
Take defensive action. Attention, all personnel. The alien being has penetrated the ship. Take defensive action.
General quarters. Security condition three. Intruder alert. Repeat. General quarters. Security condition three. Intruder alert.
As soon as she has entered the gravity chamber, secure all ports.
Don't touch me, Scotty! Stay away.
We've lost her to them.
Stay where you are.
She could kill us all in this state.
She will, unless we are able to complete what the captain has planned.
Stay with us, Mira. Please stay.
I'm trying. I want to be with you. They are too strong.
Don't lose yourself to them. Hold on.
I am Mira Romaine. I will be who I choose to be. I will. Stay away, Scotty! They are with me. They will kill you.
You won't let them.
(through Mira) She cannot stop us. You cannot prevent it.
Mira. Mira! Captain.
That's not Mira talking.
Captain, we must deal with them directly, now, while she still retains partial identity. We can speak to them. They will answer using her voice.
I'm Captain James Kirk of the spaceship Enterprise. Do you understand?
Yes, we understand you. We have searched for a millennium for one through whom we can see and speak and hear and live out our lives.
Who are you?
We are from Zetar.
That is one of the planets where all humanoid life was destroyed.
You can't be from Zetar. All life was destroyed there long ago.
Yes, all corporeal life was destroyed.
Then what are you?
The desires, the hopes, the mind and the will of the last hundred of Zetar. The force of our life could not be wiped out.
All things die.
At the proper time. Our planet was dying. We were determined to live on. At the peak of our plans to go, a sudden final disaster struck us down. But the force of our lives survived. At last we have found someone through whom we can live it out.
The body of the one you inhabit has its own life to lead.
She will accept ours.
She will not. She is fighting for her own identity.
Her mind will accept our thoughts. Our lives will be fulfilled.
Will she learn the way people on Memory Alpha learned?
We did not wish to kill.
But you did kill!
No. Resisting us killed those people. We did not kill them.
The price of your survival is too high.
We only want the girl.
You can't have her. You're entitled to your own life, but not another's.
Life was given to me. It is mine. I want to live it out. I will
The girl's life reading is becoming a match to the Zetarians. She's losing.
Do not fight us.
They will not accept their own deaths.
They'll be forced to accept it.
You will all die.
Captain, if we cannot complete the plan, they will carry out their threat.
We must get her into the pressure chamber.
Jim, you realize the pressure needed to kill the Zetars might kill the girl too.
Mira will not kill me.
I told you she wouldn't kill me.
Secure the chamber. Neutralise gravity.
The Zetars are growing stronger.
The weightless state has become their natural condition.
Pressurise the unit. Bring pressure to two atmospheres and then increase one atmosphere per second. Continue increasing pressure. Pressure, Spock. Pressure.
The pressure is dangerously high, Captain. It may damage her.
Continue, Spock.
Pressure!
We've done it, Jim. They're gone.
(intercom) It's all right, Mira. They're gone. They're gone!
Reduce the pressure very, very gradually, Spock.
We may tax Mister Scott's patience, Doctor.
Lie perfectly still, Lieutenant. Try not to move at all. Take deep, regular breaths. Now, don't hold it. Continue to breathe deeply. In, out. In, out. That's it. Now, you'll be in there another twenty minutes, so why don't you just try to relax?
Now we have all the time in the world.
Bones, are you able to judge the long range effects on Lieutenant Romaine?
When the personality of a human is involved, exact predictions are hazardous.
Particularly where humans are involved, Doctor.
However, despite Starfleet judgment of the pliancy of the Lieutenant, she put up a valiant struggle to retain her identity, and I find that encouraging.
Doctor McCoy is correct, Captain. While the truth was difficult to accept, when it was revealed, the girl reacted well. I would say her struggle in this experience would strengthen her entire ego structure.
Would either of you credit Scotty's steadfast belief in her as a factor?
You mean, love as motivation? Humans do claim a great deal for that particular emotion. I suppose it is possible. However
There are no howevers about it, Mister Spock. It was a factor, and it will be a factor in the girl's recovery.
Do I take it both of you agree that Lieutenant Romaine need not return to Starbase for further treatment?
Well, I should think work would be a better therapy.
Logical.
Captain Kirk to Mister Scott.
Scott here, sir.
Mister Scott, how's Lieutenant Romaine?
Beautiful, Captain.
Yes, Mister Scott. Do I take it you say that she is fit for duty?
Positively, Captain.
Thank you. Kirk to Bridge.
Sulu, Captain.
Mister Sulu, set course for Memory Alpha. Lieutenant Romaine has a lot of work to do there.
Yes, sir.
Well, this is an Enterprise first. Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock and Engineer Scott find themselves in complete agreement. Can I stand the strain?
Requiem For Methuselah
Report.
Jim, there's a large deposit bearing two seven three, four kilometres away. I've got four hours to process that stuff, otherwise the epidemic will be irreversible. Everybody on board the Enterprise will
Strange. Readings indicate a life form in the vicinity, apparently human. Yet ship's sensors indicated this planet was uninhabited.
Let's get that ryetalyn.
Inoperative.
Do not kill.
I'm Captain James Kirk
I know who you are. I have monitored your ship since it entered this system.
Then if you know who we are, you know why we're here, Mister?
Flint. You will leave my planet.
Did you say your planet, sir?
My retreat from the unpleasantness of life on Earth, and the company of people.
Mister Flint, I have a sick crew up there. We can't possibly reach another planet in time. You can't refuse us the ryetalyn.
You're trespassing, Captain.
We're in need! We'll pay for it, work for it, trade for it.
You have nothing I want.
But you have the ryetalyn that we need! If necessary, we'll take it.
If you do not leave voluntarily, I have the power to force you to leave or kill you where you stand.
Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott, lock phasers onto our co-ordinates.
Aye, Captain, all phasers locked on.
Mister Flint, if anything happens to us, four deaths and then my crew comes down and takes that ryetalyn.
An interesting test of power. Your enormous forces against mine. Who would win?
Mister Flint, unless you are certain, I would suggest you refrain from a most useless experiment.
We need only a few hours.
Have you ever seen a victim of Rigelian fever? They die in one day. The effects are like bubonic plague.
Constantinople, summer 1334. It marched through the streets, the sewers. It left the city by ox cart, by sea, to kill half of Europe. The rats, rustling and squealing in the night as they, too, died. The rats.
Are you a student of history, sir?
I am. The Enterprise, a plague ship. You have two hours, at the end of which time you will leave.
With all due gratitude.
M4 will gather the ryetalyn which you need. (the device leaves) Permit me to offer you more comfortable surroundings.
Come in, gentlemen.
My planet is surrounded by screens which create the impression of lifelessness. A protection against the curious, the uninvited.
Then you live here alone.
Except for M4, which serves as butler, housekeeper, gardener and guardian.
A most impressive home, Mister Flint.
Yes, a Shakespeare first folio. A Gutenberg Bible.
The Creation lithographs by Taranullus of Centauri Seven. That's one of the rarest book collections in the galaxy, spanning centuries.
Be comfortable, gentlemen. Help yourselves to brandy.
Do we trust him?
It would seem logical to do so for the moment.
Well, I'll need two hours to process that ryetalyn into antitoxin.
If that ryetalyn isn't here in one hour, we'll go prospecting, right over Mister Flint if necessary.
This is the most splendid private collection of art I've ever seen, and the most unique. The majority are the works of Leonardo da Vinci, Renaissance period, some of the works of Reginald Pollack, 20th century, and even a sten from Marcus Two.
At last I have seen other humans.
Other men.
One is not human.
The Vulcan.
Oh, so that is a Vulcan. I would like to discuss sub-dimensional physics with him. You've taught me all you know in the area and you say Vulcans know more.
Even he is not your intellectual equal, nor mine.
Let me meet them.
They are selfish, brutal, a part of the human community which I rejected and from which I've shielded you.
Soon they will be gone. Let me meet them.
Rayna. (nearly kisses her) Have you been lonely?
What is loneliness?
It is thirst. It is a flower dying in the desert.
Flint, don't take this opportunity away from me. It's so exciting.
Exciting? You have never made a demand of me before.
I'm sorry.
Do not be sorry. It might be interesting.
Saurian brandy, one hundred years old. Jim?
Please.
Mister Spock, I know you won't have one. Heaven forbid those mathematically perfect brain waves be corrupted by this all too human vice.
Thank you, Doctor. I will have a brandy.
Do you think the two of us can handle a drunk Vulcan? Once alcohol hits that green blood
If I appear distracted, it is because of what I have seen. I am close to experiencing an unaccustomed emotion.
I'll drink to that. What emotion?
Envy. None of these da Vinci paintings has ever been catalogued or reproduced. They are unknown works, all apparently authentic to the last brush stroke and use of materials. As undiscovered da Vinci's, they would be priceless.
Would be? You mean you think they're fakes?
Most strange. A man of Flint's obvious wealth and impeccable taste scarcely needs to hang fakes. Yet my tricorder analysis indicates that the canvas and pigments used are of contemporary origin.
Well, this could be what it seems to be, or it could be a cover, a setup, or even an illusion.
Well, that could explain the paintings. Similar to the real thing.
Spock, at your earliest opportunity, take a full tricorder reading of our host. See if he's human. Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott?
Aye, Captain.
Mister Scott, run a full computer check on Mister Flint and on this planet, Holberg Nine One Seven G. Stand by with your results. I'll contact.
Aye, sir.
Kirk out. Let's enjoy this brandy. It tastes real.
Easy. Bones?
Ryetalyn, ready to be processed into antitoxin.
Beam up to the ship and start processing.
That will not be necessary, Captain. M4 can prepare the ryetalyn for inoculation more quickly in my laboratory than you could aboard your ship.
I would like to supervise that, of course.
And when you are satisfied as to procedures, I hope you will do me the honour of being my guests at dinner.
Thank you, Mister Flint. I don't think we have the time.
I regret my earlier inhospitality. Let me make amends.
Gentlemen, may I present Rayna.
I thought you lived alone.
I meant there are no others besides my family. Doctor McCoy. Mister Spock.
Mister Spock, I do hope we can find a moment to discuss field density and its relationship to gravity phenomena.
Indeed. I would appreciate such a talk. It is an interest of mine.
Captain Kirk.
Captain Kirk.
Rayna.
Her parents were killed in an accident while in my employ. Before dying, they placed their infant, Rayna Kapec, in my custody. I have raised and educated her.
With most impressive results, sir. What else interests you besides gravity phenomena, Rayna?
Everything. Less than that is betrayal of the intellect.
The totality of the universe? All knowledge?
Rayna possesses the equivalent of seventeen university degrees in the sciences and arts. She is aware that the intellect is not all. But its cultivation must come first or the individual makes errors, wastes time in unprofitable pursuits.
At her age, I rather enjoyed errors with no noticeable damage, but I must admit you're the farthest thing from a bookworm I've ever seen.
Flint is my teacher. You are the only other men I've ever seen.
The misfortune of men everywhere, and our privilege.
If you would accompany my robot to the laboratory, Doctor, you can rest assured that the ryetalyn is being processed.
Thank you, sir.
Your pleasure, gentlemen. Chess, billiards, conversation?
Why not all three?
Did you teach her that?
We play often.
May I show you, Captain?
You said something about savagery, Mister Flint. When was the last time you visited Earth?
You would tell me that it is no longer cruel. But it is, Captain. Look at your starship, bristling with weapons. Its mission to colonise, exploit, destroy, if necessary, to advance Federation causes.
Thank you. Our missions are peaceful, our weapons defensive. If we were barbarians, we would not have asked for ryetalyn. Indeed, your greeting, not ours, lacked a certain benevolence.
The result of pressures which are not your concern.
Yes, well, those pressures are everywhere in everyone, urging him to what you call savagery. The private hells, the inner needs and mysteries, the beast of instinct. As human beings, that is the way it is. To be human is to be complex. You can't avoid a little ugliness from within and from without.
Why don't you play the waltz, Mister Spock? To be human is also to seek pleasure, to laugh, to dance. Rayna is a most accomplished dancer.
May I have the pleasure?
Is something wrong?
Yes, there's something wrong. The ryetalyn is no good. It contains irillium, nearly one part per thousand.
Irillium will render the antitoxin inert and useless.
Most unfortunate that it was not detected. I shall go with M4 to gather more ryetalyn and screen it myself. You're welcome to join me, Doctor.
Thank you.
Time factor, Bones? Epidemic?
Nearly two and a half hours. I guess we've got time to get in under the wire. I've never seen anything like the speed of that robot. It'd take us twice as long to process that stuff.
But would we have made the error?
Jim, what if all the ryetalyn on this planet contains irillium?
Go with Flint. Keep an eye on procedures.
Like a hawk.
Captain. Something else which is rather extraordinary. This waltz I just played is by Johannes Brahms.
Later, Spock.
Captain, it is written in manuscript. In original manuscript, in Brahms' own hand, which I recognise. It is totally unknown, definitely the work of Brahms, and yet unknown.
I think I will go to the laboratory. There may be a way of reversing the irillium's effect and saving the existing antitoxin. Stay here. Let me know when Flint and McCoy return.
You left us. The room became lonely.
It is a thirst, a flower dying in the desert.
What? What's in there?
I do not know. Flint told me never to enter. He denies me nothing else.
Then why are you here?
I do not know. I come here when I am troubled, when I would search myself.
Are you troubled now?
Yes.
By what? Are you happy here with Flint?
He is the greatest, kindest, wisest man in the galaxy.
Then why are you afraid? (he embraces her) Don't be afraid.
Stop command. Stop.
Thank you, Mister Spock.
Fortunately, the robot did not detect my presence and deactivate my phaser.
M4 was programmed to defend this household and its members. No doubt I should have altered its instructions to allow for unauthorised but predictable actions on your part. It thought you were attacking Rayna. A misinterpretation.
If it were around right now, it would correct
Too useful a device to be without, really. I created another. It will now go to the laboratory and join Doctor McCoy.
Fascinating.
Be thankful that you did not attack me, Captain. I might have accepted battle, and I have twice your physical strength.
In your own words, it would be an interesting test of power.
How childish he is, Rayna. Would you call him brave or a fool?
I'm glad he did not die.
Of course! Death, when unnecessary, is a tragic thing. Doctor McCoy's in the laboratory with the new ryetalyn. He's satisfied as to its quality. May I suggest that you wait here patiently, safely. You have seen that my defence systems operate automatically and not always in accordance with my wishes. Come, Rayna. Rayna! Come.
I don't like the way he orders her around.
Since we are dependent on Mister Flint for the ryetalyn, Captain, may I respectfully suggest that you pay less attention to the young lady if you should encounter her again. Our host's interests do not appear to be confined to art and science.
He loves her?
Strongly indicated.
Jealousy. Yes, that would explain the attack, but he seemed to want us together. The billiard game. He suggested we dance.
It does appear to defy the male logic as I understand it.
Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott.
Aye, Captain.
Report on the Rigelian fever.
Nearly everybody aboard has got it, Captain. We're working a skeleton crew and waiting for the ryetalyn.
Just a little while longer, Scotty. Report on the computer search.
There is no report on Mister Flint. He doesn't seem to have any past.
The planet was purchased thirty years ago by a Mister Brack, a wealthy financier and recluse.
Run a computer check on Rayna Kapec. Status, legal ward after the death of her parents.
Aye, sir.
Kirk out, Mister Scott.
We have still a greater mystery, Captain. I was able to run a tricorder scan on Mister Flint. He is human, but there are certain biophysical peculiarities. Some body function readings are disproportionate. For one thing, extreme age is indicated on the order of six thousand years.
Can you confirm that, Mister Spock?
I shall programme the readings through Doctor McCoy's medical computer when we return to the ship.
Time factor.
We must commence ryetalyn injections within two hours and eighteen minutes or the epidemic will prove fatal to us all.
What's keeping the processing this time?
The delay may be deliberate.
As though he's keeping us here for some reason.
Most interesting. Our host appears to wish us to linger, yet he is apprehensive. It is logical to assume that we are being monitored and that he is aware of our every move.
You sent the robot to kill him.
It came to protect you.
My mind could not have summoned it. I was not frightened.
It was defective, then. I would have destroyed it myself. Have I lied to you?
Never.
Believe what I say. I would not want Captain Kirk dead. What did you feel?
You will let them have the ryetalyn?
Yes. Go to them, if you wish. Say your farewells.
Kirk here.
Mister Scott, sir. There's no record of a Rayna Kapec in Federation legal banks.
No award of custody?
No background at all in any computer banks. Like Flint.
Kirk out. Like Flint. People without a past. What hold does he have over her?
Captain, I would suggest that our immediate concern is the ryetalyn.
Let's find McCoy.
Captain?
I'll meet you in the lab.
I've come to say goodbye.
I don't want to say goodbye.
A last tender encounter, Captain Kirk, to end your usefulness.
I tell you, Spock, I was waiting for the robot to finish the processing, and the next thing I knew it was gone and so was the ryetalyn.
Interesting. Obviously, Mister Flint is not yet ready for us to depart.
Well, I think we'd better tell Jim.
The captain wanted us to wait here.
Come with me. I offer you happiness.
I've known security here.
Childhood must end. You love me, not Flint.
Flint lied. The ryetalyn isn't here.
Picking up tricorder readings, Captain. Apparently the ryetalyn is behind this door.
Why is Flint playing tricks on us? Apparently we're supposed to go in and get it, if we can. Well, let's not disappoint the chess master. Phasers on full.
Captain, I shall get the ryetalyn.
Why you?
There may be dangers within.
Let's find out.
Let me go alone, Captain.
Why? Get to the point, Spock, if there is one.
We'll all go.
The ryetalyn.
Physically human but not human. These are earlier versions of Rayna, Jim. She's an android.
Created here by my hand. Here, the centuries of loneliness were to end.
Your collection of Leonardo da Vinci masterpieces, Mister Flint, they appear to have been recently painted on contemporary canvas with contemporary materials. And on your piano, a waltz by Johannes Brahms, an unknown work in manuscript, written in modern ink. Yet absolutely authentic, as are your paintings.
I am Brahms.
And da Vinci?
Yes.
How many other names shall we call you?
Solomon, Alexander, Lazarus, Methuselah, Merlin, Abramson. A hundred other names you do not know.
You were born?
In that region of earth later called Mesopotamia, in the year 3834 BC, as the millennia are reckoned. I was Akharin, a soldier, a bully and a fool. I fell in battle, pierced to the heart and did not die.
Instant tissue regeneration coupled with some perfect form of biological renewal. You learned that you were immortal and
And to conceal it. To live some portion of a life, to pretend to age and then move on before my nature was suspected.
Your wealth and your intellect are the product of centuries of acquisition. You knew the greatest minds in history.
Galileo, Socrates, Moses. I have married a hundred times, Captain. Selected, loved, cherished. Caressed a smoothness, inhaled a brief fragrance. Then age, death, the taste of dust. Do you understand?
You wanted a perfect, ultimate woman, as brilliant, as immortal as yourself. Your mate for all time.
Designed by my heart. I could not love her more.
Spock, you knew?
I had hoped I was wrong.
You cannot love an android, Captain. I love her. She is my handiwork, my property. She is what I desire.
She will never know.
Let's go.
You will stay.
Why?
We have discovered what he is, Captain.
If you leave, the curious would follow, the foolish, the meddlers, the officials, the seekers. My privacy was my own. Its invasion be on your head.
We can remain silent.
The disaster of intervention, Spock. I've known it. I will not risk it.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Clear out of the area. Inform Starfleet Command. Enterprise? Scotty?
They cannot answer, Captain.
My crew.
The test of power. You had no chance. It is time for you to join your crew.
You'd wipe out four hundred lives? Why?
I have seen a hundred billion fall. I know death better than any man. I have tossed enemies into his grasp. And I know mercy. Your crew is not dead, but suspended.
Worse than dead! Restore them. Restore my ship!
In time. A thousand, two thousand years. You will know the future, Captain Kirk.
You have been such men. You've known and created such beauty. You've watched your race evolve from cruelty and barbarism throughout your enormous life, and yet now you would do this to us?
The flowers of my past. I hold the nettles of the present. I am Flint now, with my needs.
What needs?
Tonight I have seen something wondrous, something I've waited for, laboured for. Nothing must endanger it. At last, Rayna's emotions have stirred to life. Now they will turn to me in this solitude which I preserve.
No.
Rayna.
You must not do this to them.
I must.
What will you feel for him after we are gone?
All emotions are in play, Mister Flint. You harm us, she hates you.
Give me back my ship. Your secret is safe with us.
That's why you delayed the processing of the ryetalyn. You realised what was happening. You kept us together, Rayna and me, because you knew I could bring her emotions alive. And now you're just going to take over.
I shall take what is mine when she comes to me. We are mated, Captain, alike, immortal. You must forget your feelings in this matter, which is quite impossible for you.
Impossible? Impossible. From the beginning, you used me. I can't love her, but I do love her. And she loves me.
No!
Captain, your primitive impulses will not alter the circumstances.
Stay out of this. We're fighting over a woman.
No, you're not, for she is not.
I cannot be the cause of this. I will not be the cause of this. Please stop. Stop! I choose where I want to go.
what I want to do. I choose. I choose.
Rayna!
No. Do not order me. No one can order me!
She's human. Down to the last blood cell, she's human. Down to the last thought, hope, aspiration, emotion, she's human. The human spirit is free. You have no power of ownership. She's free to do as she wishes.
Gentlemen, I urge you to stop. There is a danger.
No man beats me.
I don't want to beat you. This is no test of power. Rayna belongs to herself and she claims the human right of choice to be as she wills, to do as she wills, to think as she wills.
That's what I've worked for.
Rayna, come with me.
Stay.
I was not human. Now I love. I love.
You can't die.
What happened?
She loved you, Captain. And you, too, Mister Flint, as a mentor, even as a father. There was not enough time for her to adjust to the awful power and contradictions of her new-found emotions. She could not bear to hurt either of you. The joys of love made her human, and the agonies of love destroyed her.
Spock.
The epidemic is reduced and no longer a threat. The Enterprise is on course five one three mark seven, as you ordered.
A very old and lonely man. And a young and lonely man. We put on a pretty poor show, didn't we? If only I could forget.
Jim. Oh, thank heaven, sleeping at last.
Your report, Doctor.
On that day, I shall mourn. Does he know?
Yes, I told him myself. He intends to devote the remainder of his years and great abilities to the improvement of the human condition. And who knows what he might come up with.
Indeed.
Well, I guess that's all. I can tell Jim later or you can. Considering his opponent's longevity, truly an eternal triangle. You wouldn't understand that, would you, Spock? You see, I feel sorrier for you than I do for him because you'll never know the things that love can drive a man to. The ecstasies, the miseries, the broken rules, the desperate chances, the glorious failures, the glorious victories. All of these things you'll never know simply because the word love isn't written into your book. Goodnight, Spock.
Goodnight, Doctor.
I do wish he could forget her.
Forget.
The Way To Eden
It is definitely the stolen space cruiser, Captain, the Aurora. I read six aboard.
Hailing frequencies. Aurora, this is the USS Enterprise, Captain James T. Kirk commanding. Acknowledge. Aurora, this is the Enterprise. Do you read me?
They are receiving us, Captain.
I read no evidence of malfunction.
Repeat. Federation orders to detain you for
They're veering off, sir.
Change course. Pursue and overtake.
Aye, aye, sir.
Stand by tractor beams.
Standing by, sir.
If it continues on course, it will enter Romulan space.
Engage.
Tractor beam engaged.
Bring them in.
They've not cut power, sir. They're struggling to escape.
Their engines are seriously overheating, Captain.
Aurora, cut power. You are overtaxing your ship.
Power approaching critical. They cannot continue.
Emergency power to tractor beams. Bridge to Transporter room. Scotty, are you ready to transport?
Aye, Captain.
Power beyond critical. Explosion is imminent.
Are we within transportation range?
Not yet, sir.
Aurora personnel, stand by to be transported aboard. Energise.
Are they aboard? Scotty, are they aboard?
Aye, Captain. They are, and a nice lot too.
Scotty, take them to the briefing room.
We are not in the mood, Herbert.
Irina?
Tell Herbert it's no go.
No go. No go.
What's going on?
They refuse, sir.
Why?
I don't know. They're sitting on the floor, the lot of them. You can hear for yourself. Shall I send for security?
No, I'll be right down. Mister Spock.
No go, no go, no go.
No go, no go, no go.
Which one of you is Tongo Rad?
You can thank your father's influence for the fact you're not under arrest. In addition to piracy, you've left yourself open to charges of violating flight regulations, entering hostile space and endangering the lives of others as well as your own.
I'm bleeding.
In addition you've caused an interstellar incident which may have destroyed everything that's been negotiated between your planet and the Federation.
You've got a hard lip, Herbert.
If you have an explanation, I am prepared to hear it.
Mister Spock, take them to Sickbay for a medical check. There may have been radiation from the explosion.
Captain, with your permission
By all means.
One.
(An older male with alien ears. Obviously the leader) We are One.
One is the beginning.
(A red-headed youth) Are you One, Herbert?
I am not Herbert.
He is not Herbert. We reach.
If you will state your purpose and your objectives, perhaps we can arrive at a mutual understanding.
If you understand One, you know our purpose.
I would prefer that you state it.
We turn our backs on confusion and seek the beginning.
What is your destination?
The planet Eden.
That planet it is a myth.
And we protest against being harassed, pursued, attacked, seized and transported here against our wishes.
Right, brother.
We do not recognise Federation regulations nor the existence of hostilities. We recognise no authority save that within ourselves.
Well, whether you recognise authority or not, I am it on this ship. I am under orders to transport you back to Starbase peaceably. From there you'll be ferried to your various planets. Because of my orders, you are not prisoners, but my guests. I expect you to behave as such.
Oh, Herbert, you are stiff!
Mister Spock, you seem to understand these people. You will deal with them.
We respectfully request that you take us to Eden.
And after they are finished in Sickbay, see to it that they're escorted back to their proper quarters and given whatever care they need.
Yes, Captain.
We respectfully request that you take us to Eden.
I have orders to the contrary. This is not a passenger ship.
Herbert, Herbert, Herbert.
Herbert, Herbert, Herbert. Herbert, Herbert, Herbert.
Lieutenant Palmer, notify Starbase we have the six aboard who stole the space cruiser Aurora. Regrettably, the space cruiser itself was destroyed.
Aye, sir.
Personal note to the Catullan ambassador. His son is safe.
Captain.
Yes, what is it?
Sir, I believe I know one of them. At least, I think I recognise her voice. Her name is Irina Galliulin. We were in Starfleet Academy together.
One of those was in the Academy?
Yes, sir. She dropped out. She
Do you wish to see her? Permission to leave your post.
Thank you, sir.
Are they in the Sickbay?
Yes, Captain.
Mister Spock, do they really believe that Eden exists?
Many myths are based on truth, Captain, and they are not unintelligent. Their leader, Doctor Sevrin, is a man
Doctor Sevrin is their leader?
Yes. A brilliant research engineer in the fields of acoustics, communications and electronics on Tiburon. He was dismissed from his post when he started this movement. Tong Rad inherits his father's extraordinary abilities in the field of space studies.
Well. But they've rejected all that and all that this technology provides. And they seek the primitive.
There are many who are uncomfortable with what we have created. It is almost a biological rebellion. A profound revulsion against the planned communities, the programming, the sterilised, artfully balanced atmospheres. They hunger for an Eden where spring comes.
All do. The cave is deep in our memory.
Yes, that is true, Captain.
It is not sympathy so much as curiosity, Captain. A wish to understand. They regard themselves as aliens in their own worlds, a condition with which I am somewhat familiar.
Spock. What does Herbert mean?
It is somewhat uncomplimentary, Captain. Herbert was a minor official notorious for his rigid and limited patterns of thought.
Well, I shall try to be less rigid in my thinking.
(playing a guitar without a sound box) Looking for the good land, Going astray. Don't cry, don't cry. Oh, I can't have honey, And I can't have cream. Gonna live, not die. Gonna live, not die. (Rad plays bongos) Stand in the middle of it all one day. I'll look at it shining all around me and say, I'm here, I'm here, In the good land. In the new land. I'm here.
Excuse me. Is Irina Galliulin with you?
She's getting her physical. Gonna crack my knuckles and jump for joy. I got a clean bill of health from Doctor McCoy. You know Irina?
Say, tell me, why do you wear all those clothes? How do you breathe?
(to Sevrin) You're next.
Irina.
Pavel Andreievich. I had thought we might encounter each other.
You knew I was on the Enterprise?
I had heard.
Irina, why? Come.
How could you do this to yourself? You were a scientist. And now, look at you.
Look at yourself, Pavel.
Why did you do it?
Why did you?
I am proud of what I am. I believe in what I do. Can you say that?
Yes. Oh, we should not tear at each other so, Pavel. We should meet again in joy. Today when I first knew it was your ship that followed us, I thought of you and wondered what I would find. And I remembered so much. In spite of that uniform, I still see the same Pavel I used to know.
Are you happy in what you do?
Yes.
Then I accept what you do.
You even talk like them. Why did you go away?
It was you who went.
I came back to look for you. I looked. Where did you go?
I stayed in the city, with friends.
You never felt as I did. Never.
I did.
You don't have it in you to feel so much. Even when we were close, you weren't with me. You were off thinking of something else. Why did you stay away?
Because you disapproved of me, Just as you do now. Oh, Pavel, you have always been like this. So correct. And inside, the struggle not to be. Give in to yourself. You will be happier. You'll see.
Go to your friends.
Free Doctor Sevrin! Free Doctor Sevrin! We want to see him right now!
We want to see him now!
Herbert! Herbert! Herbert! Herbert!
I thought all the animals were kept in cages.
What's going on, Bones?
Trouble. Your friend here didn't want a checkup. Turns out there's a reason.
I refuse to accept your findings.
You don't have the choice.
They're the product of prejudice, not science.
I don't know what this man was planning on doing on a primitive planet, but assuming one did exist, I can tell you what would have happened had he settled there.
Untrue!
There wouldn't have been enough primitives left to bury their dead.
Fantasy. Fantasy.
I wish it were. There's a nasty little bug evolved in the last few years, Jim. Our aseptic, sterilised civilisations produced it. Synthococcus novae. It's deadly. We can immunise against it, but haven't learned to lick all the problems yet.
Does he have it? What about the others?
All the others are clear. He doesn't have it. He's a carrier. Remember your ancient history? Typhoid Mary? He's immune, as she was, but he carries the disease and spreads it to others.
Is the crew in danger?
I don't know. They all had full spectrum immunisations before boarding. Now my guess is that his friends have had their shots too. But a regular programme of shots is necessary. I'll have to check everyone on the ship. There could be some skips. In the meantime, he should be placed in total isolation.
This is outrageous. You're not isolating me, you're imprisoning me. You invent a crime, find me guilty and sentence me!
Would you like to run the test, Doctor? You knew you were a carrier before you came aboard, didn't you?
No!
Then why did you fight the examination?
It was an infringement on my rights.
Put him in isolation.
Be ready for the objections, Jim. They are a vocal lot.
Yes, I'm ready. Kirk to Security. I want a guard maintained on Doctor Sevrin until further notice. Bones, how long before we know whether the crew has been endangered by this infection?
It'll show in twenty four hours. It's a virulent strain.
You don't belong with them! You know what we want. You want it too. Come, join us.
How do you know what I want?
You're young. Think young, brother!
You make it tempting.
Mister Sulu. Mister Sulu, explain.
No explanation, sir.
Doctor Sevrin will be released when we think he is medically safe.
(singing) Stiff man putting my mind in jail. And the judge bang the gavel and say no bail. Gonna lick his hand and wag my tail.
Herbert! Herbert!
Engineering to Bridge.
Yes, Scotty, what is it?
Captain, I just had to give one of those barefooted what do you call 'ems the boot out of here. She came in bold as brass, tried to incite my crew to disaffect.
Thank you, Scotty. Mister Spock, I don't seem to be able to communicate with these people. Do you think you can persuade them to behave?
I shall make an attempt, Captain.
Thank you, Mister Spock. If it weren't for that ambassador's son, they'd all be in the brig.
Yes, sir.
I have no influence over what they do.
They respect you. They will listen to your reasoning. For their sake, you must stop them. Doctor Sevrin, I'm in a position to help you and your group. I can use the resources of the Enterprise to determine whether or not Eden actually exists and to plot its exact location. I can present a case to Federation to allow you and your group to colonise that planet. Neither you nor your people are at present charged with a crime. However, incitement to disaffection is criminal. The Federation will never allow the colonisation of a planet by criminals. If they persist, they will be so charged and forever barred from Eden.
As I have been barred.
Then you knew you were a carrier.
Of course I knew. You've researched my life. You've read the orders restricting me to travel only in areas of advanced technology because of what my body carries.
What I fail to understand is why you disobey those orders.
Because this is poison to me. This stuff you breathe, this stuff you live in, the shields of artificial atmosphere that we have layered about every planet. The programs in those computers that run your ship and your lives for you, they bred what my body carries. That's what your science have done to me. You've infected me. Only the primitives can cleanse me. I cannot purge myself until I am among them. Only their way of living is right. I must go to them.
Your very presence will destroy the people you seek. Surely you know that.
I shall go to them and be One with them. And together we shall build a world such as this galaxy has never seen. A world. A life. A life. So now you're going to try to persuade me that your technologies will find a cure for me, and then I'll be free to go.
Yes, Doctor.
And for that reason I should persuade my friends to behave so that they too will be allowed.
Yes, Doctor.
All right, you send them in. I'll talk to them.
Doctor Sevrin is insane. I've not consulted Doctor McCoy, but I have no doubt of it.
I'll have Bones check him out. Spock, I'm sorry. You had great respect for him. But it does explain some of what they've done.
His condition does not affect my interest in the movement. There is no insanity in what they seek. I made a promise which I should like to keep. With your permission, I must locate Eden. I shall work in my quarters. May I have the assistance of Mister Chekov in auxiliary control?
Certainly. Mister Chekov, assist Mister Spock. Bridge to Sickbay.
McCoy here.
Bones.
Yes, Captain.
I'd like to talk to you.
Come in.
Am I crossing you?
No.
I was just thinking, I (sees the lyre) Hey, brother, do you play? Is it Vulcan? Can I try it?
Oh ho, that's now. That's real now. I reach that, brother. I really do. Give.
Hey, how about a session, you and us? It would sound. That's what I came for. I wanted to ask, you know, great white captain upstairs, but he don't reach us. But would he shake on a session? I mean, we want to co-operate, like you ask, so I'm asking.
If I understand you correctly, I believe the answer might be yes.
I'll spread the word.
Am I allowed in?
Yes.
I have been looking for you, Pavel. What room is this?
Auxiliary control.
What's it for?
Should the main control room breakdown or suffer damage, we can navigate the ship from here. What do you want?
To apologise. I should not have teased you. It was cruel.
It does not matter.
Oh, but it does. It is against everything I believe in.
Let us not discuss your beliefs.
And I do not like having you angry with me, or disapproving.
Then why do you do such things?
What are you working on?
I am assisting Mister Spock in locating your Eden.
Oh, now you are teasing me.
I am not. These tapes contain star charts, and we project the orbits of the various planets here. By mathematical process, we determine whether or not they are affected by other bodies not yet charted.
Do you know all these things?
What I do not know I find out from the computer banks. If, if I knew nothing at all, I could navigate the ship simply by studying what is stored in there. They contain the sum of all human knowledge. They solve our problems of navigation. Of control. Of life support.
They tell you what to do, and you do what they tell you.
No. We use our own judgment also.
I could never obey a computer.
You could never listen to anyone. You always had to be different.
Not different. What I wanted to be. There is nothing wrong in doing what you want.
I am not receiving, Mister Chekov. Spock to Chekov. Repeat, I am not receiving.
I am sorry, Mister Spock. I was momentarily delayed.
His name is Sulu, specialist in weapons and navigation. His hobby is botany.
Can?
Can. I reach botany. It's my favorite of studies. What's yours?
Vulcan. Spock is practically One now.
Everything can be handled from auxiliary control. The computers contain all the information we need. We can do it.
It starts to chime.
When will it?
Soon. Like he said now, we should all go out and swing as many as possible over.
Can you suggest any special ways to swing them?
Just be friendly. You know how to be friendly. Then they'll be friendly.
(singing) I'm talkin ''bout you, I'm talkin ''bout me. Long time back when the galaxy was new. Man found out what he had to do. Found he had to eat and he found he had to drink. And a long time later he found he had to think. Uh huh. Yes, think. I'm standing here wondering.
What?
If a man tells another man out of my way. He piles up trouble for himself all day. But all kinds of trouble come to an end. When a man tells another man be my friend, uh huh. My friend. Well, what's it going to be?
Can't reach across it, hardly even see.
(with chorus) Let's say goodbye, or let's say brother. Brother. Brother. Hey, out there. Hey, out there. Hey, out there. Hey, out there. I see you. I see you. I see you. I see you. Let's get together and have some fun. I don't know how to do it but it's got to be done.
At least we know where they are and what they're doing. I don't know why a young mind has to be an undisciplined one. They're troublemakers.
I used to get into a little trouble when I was that age, Scotty. Didn't you?
Captain, I get no response from controls. We're going off course.
It's shorted. No, it's channeled over somewhere. To auxiliary control.
Bridge to auxiliary control. Bridge to auxiliary control.
Captain, it seems as though someone else is running the ship.
That's right, someone else is running this ship.
I am. All functions, life support as well. You cannot interfere, as I have frozen the doors to the control room.
I do not intend to hand over the helm to you until and unless we reach Eden.
If I am in any way prevented from reaching that destination, I shall destroy this ship and all aboard.
Can he do it?
He has the capability, Captain.
He's got everything channelled over.
Start a trace-back of all circuits.
See if you can bypass him.
Do that, and I shall retaliate.
I shall not warn you again.
Captain, we're now leaving the Neutral Zone. Bearing into Romulan space!
Any patrols?
Negative.
There will be soon. Doctor Sevrin. You are violating Romulan space and endangering the peace of the galaxy.
The Romulans will view this as a military intrusion and attack. Bring the ship about now. If you bring her about
And return to Starbase, no charges will be leveled.
Like you said, Brother Sevrin.
If you do not, you will never reach Eden. You and this ship will be destroyed.
He's got jelly in the belly. Real scared.
Adam.
Rad.
You are being led by a man who is insane.
You are being used by him.
Spock, you tell them.
Adam, there is a file on Doctor Sevrin in our computer banks. In it you'll find a report attesting to the fact
That he is a carrier of a bacillus strain known as Synthococcus novae.
(sarcastic) Ain't that just awful.
You'll also find a report from the same hospital, giving a full psychological profile on him and projecting these actions of his.
Yay, brother.
Adam. You know I reach you. I believe in what you seek. But there is a tragic difference between what you want and what he wants.
You're making me cry.
There it is. They've established Eden, Brother Sevrin.
Pavel said they would. Our original course must have been somewhat in error.
When will we get there?
At this speed, three hours.
They'll try to persuade us to change course presently and then they'll attack.
How do you plan to stop them? By cutting off their life support?
I have another weapon. Take control, Brother Rad.
What are you doing?
Making an adjustment on their circuits.
(singing) Headin' out to Eden. Yea, brother. Headin' out to Eden. No more trouble in my body or my mind. Gonna live like a king on whatever I find, Eat all the fruit and throw away the rind. Yea, brother. Yea.
We are within sensor range of Eden and continuing to approach.
Whatever they're going to do, they're going to do now. We have no choice. Mister Spock, Mister Scott.
When will you use that?
At the proper time. Let me know when we're in orbit.
Approaching right on the dot, just as they plotted it, Brother Sevrin.
What will that do to them? What is it?
Well, I'm using sound against them, beyond the ultrasonic. It will stun them and allow us time to leave. We'll go in one of their shuttlecraft.
Sound pitched that high doesn't stun, it destroys. I remember when we read in the text that it
I've gone beyond those texts, Irina. It's correct for you to be concerned, but be assured also.
We are in orbit over Eden, Brother Sevrin. It does destroy.
We cannot allow them to come after us. It will not reach us in here. I can control it all. I have adjusted it so that it will suspend its effects after a few moments and allow us time to escape. Then, after we've gone, it will automatically reactivate. Rejoice, brethren. Soon we shall step together into Eden.
Spock! It's all right, Spock. It stopped.
No, Captain, it hasn't stopped. It has gone beyond
Captain, they're using
Steppin' into Eden. Yea, brother. Steppin' into Eden. Yea, brother. No more trouble in my body or my mind. Gonna live like a king on whatever find. Eat all the fruit and throw away the rind. Yea, brother.
Now we may leave.
(in pain) Captain, go. I. You must destroy the
What is it?
Ultrasonics. The panel.
Kirk to Engineering. Bridge? Hangar deck? Kirk to Transporter Room. Kirk to Bridge. Do you read me? Come in.
Sulu here, Captain. What happened to us? I heard a whistle, and then
Never mind. Do we have control of the ship?
No, sir. Control is in auxiliary.
Can we break out of orbit if we have to?
I think so, sir.
Hangar Deck to Captain.
Kirk here.
Sir, one of the shuttlecrafts has been taken. We were all knocked out.
Stand by. Do you read any Romulans?
Negative, Captain. However I am picking up the shuttlecraft.
Where?
It has landed. Except for those aboard the craft, I read no life at all, either humanoid nor animal.
Auxiliary control to Doctor McCoy. Bones, are you all right?
Yes, Jim.
Stand by, transporter room. Full medical gear.
Bridge to Captain Kirk. Do you wish to open communication, sir?
No. No, they tried to destroy us. Let them think they succeeded. I want the co-ordinates zeroed in so that when we beam down, we won't be visible to them. Scotty, you have the conn. If any Romulans appear, try to make them understand. I do not want to provoke combat. Mister Spock. Mister Chekov, join us in the transporter room.
The legends were true, Captain. Fantastically beautiful planet.
Eden.
Is this what they believed they'd find? Then I can understand. Spread out. Approach with caution. (into communicator) Doctor Sevrin.
What is it?
The flower, sir. I touched it. It's like fire.
It's burned. All this plant life is full of acid. Even the grass, Jim.
Will our clothing protect us?
It should for a while.
Captain.
Bones?
Poison. The fruit is deadly.
His name was Adam.
There's the shuttlecraft.
Here, we'll help you.
Doctor Sevrin. Bones!
He should be beamed aboard, Jim. He needs more than I can do for him here.
Spock to Enterprise.
Enterprise here.
Stand by to beam aboard injured parties. Medical team to the transporter room.
No, we're not leaving.
We can help you aboard the ship.
We're not leaving Eden, none of us.
Be sensible, Doctor.
We're not leaving.
Come back here, you fool!
Sevrin, don't! You'll kill yourself!
Don't bite into that!
Stop!
It was so beautiful.
I have Starbase now, Captain.
Alert them that we have the four and we're ready to beam them down. And mark the incident closed.
Aye, sir.
Bridge to Transporter. Scotty, are they there?
Three of them, sir. Expecting a fourth any minute.
Stand by. Mister Chekov, do you wish to attend?
Captain, I wish first to apologise for my conduct during this time. I did not maintain myself under proper discipline. I endangered the ship and its personnel by my conduct. I respectfully submit myself for disciplinary action.
Thank you, Mister Chekov. You did what you had to do. As did we all. Even your friends. You may go.
Thank you, sir.
I was coming to say goodbye.
And I was coming to say goodbye to you. (a kiss) Be incorrect, occasionally.
And you be correct.
Occasionally.
Miss Galliulin. It is my sincere wish that you do not give up your search for Eden. I have no doubt but that you will find it, or make it yourselves.
Thank you.
We reach, Mister Spock.
The Cloud Minders
(dictating) At Federation orders, we're proceeding at top warp speed to the planet Ardana, where the only source of zenite exists. It is the one substance that can halt the plague.
Captain, the High Advisor of Ardana is ready to receive you on Stratos, sir.
On Stratos? That's their cloud city, isn't it, Mister Spock?
It is, Captain.
There must be some mistake. Do you have the co-ordinates to the mine entrance available?
They've already been provided to the transport officer, Captain. Along with those of the council chamber of the High Advisor.
Kirk to transporter room.
Ready to transport, Captain.
Mister Scott, are you locked in on the mine entrance or on their cloud city, Stratos?
The mine entrance. That's what you ordered, Captain.
Fine. Uhura. Tell the High Advisor that we request to dispense with the welcoming ceremonies due to the emergency, and that we're beaming directly down to the mine entrance in order to ensure the fastest possible delivery of the zenite. The need is urgent.
Aye, sir.
Mister Spock, come with me. Oh, and tell them that we appreciate the honour and that we look forward to some visit in the future.
Aye, sir.
Stratos, Captain. A city actually floating in the sky.
Looks as tranquil as its reputation, doesn't it.
It is one of the most interesting metropolises in the galaxy. Have you ever visited here, Captain?
Once. I didn't have time to look around.
I've never had the opportunity. However, I hear its art forms are incomparable.
Yes, art is the population's chief occupation.
It is a totally intellectual society. All forms of violence have been eliminated.
There's the mine entrance. The zenite consignment should have been there. I don't understand it. Those Troglyte miners were supposed to have made delivery when we beamed down.
Perhaps there is another entrance, Captain.
Perhaps.
It would seem the Troglytes have changed their minds about delivery.
Who are you? What's the meaning of this attack?
(a woman in blue) Interference breeds attack, Captain. Come on!
We're here by permission of your government council on an emergency mission.
Move on, Captain!.
Troglytes, halt!
Surrender or we'll fire!
Are you harmed, gentlemen?
No, just a little shaken up.
I'm Plasus, High Advisor of the planet council.
Captain Kirk, Enterprise. My first officer, Mister Spock.
Greetings, Mister Advisor.
My regrets for the unpleasantness of your welcome to Ardana.
It was rather warm.
Unfortunately, violence is habitual with the Troglytes. But I assure you, this insult will not go unpunished.
Well, I'm more concerned with the zenite consignment. Why wasn't it in its specified location?
Apparently the Disrupters have confiscated it, as I knew they would.
The Disrupters? Who are they?
A small group of Troglyte malcontents. All the other Troglytes are completely dominated by them. It's the Disrupters who are responsible for their refusal to continue mining for zenite.
They agreed to the delivery. Your council assured us of it.
They agreed obviously as a ruse to get valuable hostages.
Hostages? For what purpose?
To force the council to meet their demands. (to guards) Organise a search party immediately and find the zenite consignment.
Meanwhile, Captain, I would suggest that you and First Officer Spock be our guests on Stratos.
Very well. I do hope the search will be brief, Mister Advisor.
We'll do everything possible to make it so. Come, gentlemen.
Remarkable. The finest example of sustained antigravity elevation I've ever seen.
The sentinel told me of our honoured guests, my father. I came to extend greetings.
A most gracious act. One of our planet's most incomparable works of art. My daughter, Droxine. Captain James Kirk.
Pleasure, madam.
Indeed, yes, Captain.
And First Officer Spock.
I have never before met a Vulcan, sir.
Nor I a work of art, madam.
Come, gentlemen. There is much to see in our city. This is our council gallery. It is open to all city dwellers. We have some of the finest of our various art forms assembled here for the viewing and contemplation of every
Disrupters again.
How dreadful!. They're despoiling the whole city.
Despoil? For what purpose?
By keeping us in constant turmoil, they hope to force the council to accede to their demands.
What are their demands?
Completely unreasonable, Captain, but nothing you need be concerned with.
I must concern myself with it if it should interfere with the delivery of zenite to Merak Two.
Mister Advisor, the plant life is the source of oxygen on that planet. Obviously, if all plant life is destroyed, the humanoid life will follow.
I assure you, gentlemen, you will get what you came for.
I hope so. Ardana is a member of the Federation, and it is your council's responsibility that nothing interferes with its obligation to another member of the Federation.
Of course, and we accept the responsibility.
But why do they destroy art forms? That is a loss to everyone.
Art means nothing to the Disrupters. This (the dagger) is the only form they understand. The disturbances accompanying your arrival have been most wearying. No doubt you would like to rest.
That would be most welcome, Mister Advisor.
Chambers have been prepared for you. A sentinel will guide you to them.
I'm sorry they were so poorly treated on their first visit to our planet.
It's fortunate that they were not seriously hurt.
Oh, yes, that would have been dreadful.
Further violence could create grave difficulties between Ardana and the Federation.
The Disrupters must be mad to attack two such charming strangers.
They grow more daring and determined every day. Now they seek to find allies in the galaxy.
Do you think that Captain Kirk and his very attractive officer will feel that we're responsible for their injuries?
All this time I thought you were worried about our diplomatic relations.
Apologies, Mister Advisor, but this Troglyte was apprehended leaving the city. He is without a transport card so we thought you would want to question him.
Remove his shields.
What is your business in Stratos, Troglyte? Speak! I command you!
My business is to repair.
Repair what?
There are damaged entrance panels.
Indeed. Then you must have a repair permit. Where is it?
It was forgotten.
Did you also forget your transport card?
It was lost when your sentinels attacked me.
And where was your cavern implement lost? Could this perhaps be it?
I came to make repairs.
And you shall make them by giving us the names of the Disrupters.
I know nothing.
I would advise you to increase your knowledge.
That is not possible for a Troglyte. The Stratos city dwellers have said it.
Secure him to the rostrum.
How unfortunate. How unfortunate.
This troubled planet is a place of the most violent contrasts. Those who receive the rewards are totally separated from those who shoulder the burdens. It is not a wise leadership. Here on Stratos, everything is incomparably beautiful and pleasant. The High Advisor's charming daughter Droxine, particularly so. The name Droxine seems appropriate for her. I wonder, can she retain such purity and sweetness of mind and be aware of the life of the people on the surface of the planet? There, the harsh life in the mines is instilling the people with a bitter hatred. The young girl who led the attack against us when we beamed down was filled with the violence of desperation. If the lovely Droxine knew of the young miner's misery, I wonder how the knowledge would affect her.
Mister Spock, I thought you had accompanied Captain Kirk to the rest chamber.
Your movements awakened me.
My apologies. I did not realise they would disturb you.
Only Vulcan ears would find the noise discernible.
It seems that Vulcans are fascinatingly different in many ways.
The same may be said of Stratos inhabitants.
Vulcan eyes are very discerning too. I hear that, intellectually, Vulcans are as highly evolved as Stratos city dwellers.
We do pride ourselves on our logic.
You again!
You sleep lightly, Captain.
Yes, duty is a good teacher. I see you've changed your dressmaker.
Release me.
So you can attack me again? That would be foolish.
Call the guards if you're afraid, Captain.
I'm not afraid. In fact, I find this rather enjoyable.
I do not!
All right, I'll make a deal with you. You answer some questions and I'll let you up.
What questions?
Your word first.
I will answer.
You only take a mate once every seven years?
The seven-year cycle is biologically inherent in all Vulcan's. At that time, the mating drive outweighs all other motivations.
And is there nothing that can disturb that cycle, Mister Spock?
Extreme feminine beauty is always disturbing, madam.
Spock?
I did not come here to kill you, Captain.
Then why this?
To take you hostage.
Am I intruding, Captain?
Vanna!
Droxine.
Why have you come here?
To welcome our honoured guests as I was taught to do when I served in your father's household.
Has she injured you, Captain?
No, not at all. In fact her visit was quite enlightening.
Oh?
Yes, it seems the Troglytes are under the impression that the Enterprise is here to intimidate them.
(into intercom) Send a sentinel to the rest chamber immediately.
It is not impression, Captain. It is the truth.
We're here to get that zenite consignment, and that's it.
Starships do not transport cargo.
In times of emergency, they do anything. And believe me, this botanical plague is an emergency.
Lies will not keep the Troglytes in the caverns, and neither will your starship.
You talk like a Disrupter, Vanna.
I speak for my people. They have as much right to the clouds as the Stratos dwellers.
But Stratos is for advisors and studiers. What would Troglytes do here?
Live in the sunlight and warmth, as everyone should.
The caverns are warm and your eyes are not accustomed to light, just as your minds are not accustomed to logic.
Unaccustomed to light and warmth? That's necessary to all humanoids. Surely, you don't deny it to the Troglytes.
The Troglytes are workers, Captain. Oh surely, you must be aware of that. They mine zenite for shipment, till the soil. Those things cannot be done here.
In other words, they perform all the physical toil necessary to maintain Stratos.
That is their function in our society.
But they are not allowed to share its advantages.
How can they share what they do not understand?
They can be taught to understand, especially in a society that prides itself in enlightenment.
The complete separation of toil and leisure has given Ardana this perfectly balanced social system, Captain. Why should we change it?
The surface of the planet is almost unendurable. To restrict a segment of the population to such hardship is unthinkable in an evolved culture.
The surface is marred by violence, like the Troglytes. But here in Stratos, we have completely eliminated violence.
You still refuse to disclose the names of the other Disrupters.
There are no Disrupters!
Very well, if you prefer the rays.
Troglyte is an abbreviation of an ancient Earth term. Its technical translation is cave dweller.
Yes, I should have realised.
Mister Advisor!
You said you were going to question Vanna, not torture her.
She's stubborn, and as you yourself pointed out, Captain, the search for your zenite consignment must be short.
Surely there are better methods than this.
Physical discomfort is extremely persuasive, Captain.
Yes, but I won't stand by while someone is tortured!
Is it preferable to spare Vanna and allow an entire planet to be destroyed?
Violence in reality is quite different from theory, is it not, madam?
But what else can they understand, Mister Spock?
All the little things you and I understand and expect from life, such as equality, kindness, justice.
Troglytes are not like Stratos dwellers, Mister Spock. They're a conglomerate of inferior species. The abstract concepts of an intellectual society are beyond their comprehension.
The abstract concepts of loyalty and leadership seem clear to Vanna.
A few Troglytes are brought here as retainers. Vanna was one of them, as are the sentinels. They've received more training than the others.
But obviously no more consideration.
I fail to see the purpose of this continued criticism.
The only way you'll use that device again is on one of us.
An imposing display of primitive gallantry, gentlemen. You realise, of course, that the sentinels could remove you.
Of course, but Starfleet command won't take kindly to having either rays or physical force used against one of its command personnel, Mister Advisor.
Why are you so concerned with this Disrupter's well-being?
Beyond plain humanitarianism, my orders are to get that zenite.
Then stop interfering, and I'll get it for you.
You won't get it through torture.
We will get it for you, and in our own way. Remove the prisoner to confinement quarters. You will return to your ship at once or I shall contact your Starfleet command myself and report your interference with this planet's government.
Kirk to Enterprise.
Enterprise, Captain.
Mister Scott, we're ready to beam up.
Aye, sir.
(to sentinel) If Captain Kirk appears again, kill him.
Lieutenant Uhura, advise Starfleet command that the zenite has not been delivered. In my opinion, Plasus' method of accomplishing delivery will not succeed. If the zenite is not delivered shortly, I shall have to violate Plasus' order of non-interference and win the confidence of the Troglyte leader with the use of reason.
That may not be easy, Jim. Medical analysis indicates the Troglytes are mentally inferior.
That's impossible, Bones. The Troglytes have accepted personal sacrifice, a common cause. Mentally inferior beings aren't capable of that.
Look, I've checked my findings thoroughly. Their intellect ratings are almost twenty percent below average.
But they're all the same species. Those who live on Stratos and those who live below all originated on the planet. Their physical and mental evolution must be similar. That is basic biological law.
That's true, Spock, but obviously the ancestors of those who live on Stratos removed themselves from the environment of the mines. Therefore they avoided the effects of certain natural growths.
Natural growths? What kind?
Well. I had this zenite sample sent up from the surface. Now unsealed, it would have had detrimental effects on everybody here.
Incredible. Zenite is shipped all over the galaxy wherever there is danger of plant bacteria. No side effects have ever been reported.
There are none after it's refined. But in its raw state, it emits a odourless, invisible gas that retards the intellectual functioning of the mind and heightens the emotional. Therefore, it releases a violent reaction.
And the mines are full of that gas.
That's right. And the Troglytes are constantly exposed to it. 
Bones, the Disrupters, Vanna. It seems impossible. They've outwitted a highly organised, scientific culture for months.
As part of the staff of Stratos, Vanna was removed from exposure for a long period. It is likely that without such exposure, the effect slowly wears off.
That's right, Spock. The other Disrupters were probably removed from exposure too.
Does the brain return to normal?
According to findings, it should.
Can you neutralise the gas?
No, but a filter mask should remove the exposure.
Find one. Meet us in the transporter room.
This mask automatically eliminates all substance injurious to humanoid life, chemical as well as bacterial. We have used these filter masks frequently on
Do you really expect me to believe that that mask can achieve intellectual equality for the Troglytes?
There's every indication that the effect of the gas is temporary, even after repeated exposure.
How can a mere filter accomplish what centuries of evolution have failed to do?
Doctor McCoy has analysed the zenite thoroughly. We've checked his findings through the computer and they're absolutely valid.
And do your computers explain how my ancestors, who also dwelt in caverns, evolved sufficiently to erect Stratos while the Troglytes did not?
Unequal evolution did not begin until after your ancestors removed themselves from constant exposure to the gas, Mister Advisor.
Preposterous.
There's no time to argue about the findings now. I simply propose to tell Vanna all about them.
I doubt whether even Vanna will believe such nonsense!
This nonsense might mean a great deal to the Troglytes. I would like to offer them a supply of these filter masks in exchange for the zenite consignment.
I'm sorry, Captain. Such an offer could only cause more unrest among them. I cannot allow it until our scientists have checked the findings.
But that could take days.
Are you afraid the filter masks will work? Is that why you don't want the Troglytes to try them?
You are here to complete an emergency mission, not conduct tests, Captain.
I am here to get that zenite. If these will help me get them, I'll use them.
And I forbid it. Your Federation orders do not entitle you to defy local governments. This communication has ended.
My diplomacy is somewhat inadequate.
It's pretty hard to overcome prejudice.
Doesn't give us much choice, does it.
Nor much time. We have ten hours and forty minutes to deliver that consignment to Merak Two.
Beam me down to Vanna's confinement quarters.
You mean you're going back to Stratos against government orders?
If Vanna doesn't have something definite to gain for her people, she'll die rather than turn over that zenite consignment. This is the only thing that might convince her.
Captain, if you are apprehended deliberately violating the High Advisor's orders, he will be within his rights to have you executed, if he chooses.
If you're about to suggest that you contact Vanna, the answer is negative, Spock. That goes for you too, Bones.
Allow me to point out that a first officer is more expendable than either a doctor or a captain.
Officially, yes. But this mission is strictly unofficial. Nobody's to have any part in it, any responsibility for it, but myself. That's an order, Spock. You have the conn. Stand by till I contact you.
Vanna, I've brought you a gift. There's a dangerous gas in the mines that affects the development of the Troglytes exposed to it for a period of time. This mask will prevent any further damage.
Gas from zenite?
Yes.
It's hard to believe something which is neither seen nor felt can do so much harm.
That's true. But an idea can't be seen or felt. That's what's kept the Troglytes in the mines all these centuries, a mistaken idea.
Would all the Troglytes wear these masks?
Yes. I'll see to it that the Federation engineers construct them.
Suppose Plasus does not agree?
Plasus is not the whole government.
That is true, but the city council will not listen to Troglytes.
As soon as the zenite is delivered to Merak Two, I'll come back. I'll request permission to mediate for the Troglytes. Vanna, you must trust me. I give you my word.
Centuries ago, Stratos was built by leaders that gave their word that all inhabitants would live there. The Troglytes are still waiting.
The zenite can be delivered in a few hours. You won't have long to wait now.
Hours can be centuries, just as words can be lies.
Vanna, you must trust me. If you don't, millions of people will die. A whole planet. This zenite is all that can save them. This filter mask is all that can save the Troglytes. Trust me. Please.
Very well, Captain. I will trust you. The consignment lies deep in the mines in a place known only to Troglytes. I cannot direct you. I must take you there. You asked for my trust, Captain. Are you unwilling to give yours?
It's the sentinel with my refreshment.
Wait. We'll need a transport pass to leave the city.
Midro.
Vanna.
Anka.
And I've brought with me a hostage. Seize him!
(wearing the mask) We had a bargain. Why did you break it?
Did you really think I would trust you, Captain? I'm not such a fool.
I trusted you.
You thought you would trick me with your talk of your filter and your unseen gas. I don't believe you any more than Plasus does.
Then you are a fool. These masks will free you, just as I said.
Our weapons are our freedom. And you've just furnished me with two very valuable ones. Yourself and this. (phaser)
Holding me won't help you. My men'll still come for that zenite consignment.
Without your communicator, you will be hard to locate.
They'll still come.
Perhaps. In the meantime, a taste of our existence, Captain. Dig as the Troglytes do. As the Troglytes do.
Without that mask, I haven't
With your bare hands, Captain.
You dig well, Captain. The unseen gas doesn't seem to be harming you.
It takes a while for its effects to be noticed.
Nevertheless, you won't be needing this. Anka, deposit this on the transport platform so Plasus will know we have something more valuable to bargain with than our mortaes and thongs.
Searchers will be coming soon, Midro. Go to the other mines and tell the Troglytes to post watchers.
What of him?
I will see that he doesn't escape.
If we kill him, there will be no need to see.
A dead hostage is of no value, Midro.
Only the Troglytes will know.
I brought him here and I will say what is to be done.
You are not the only Disrupter. I, too, can say.
Can you do nothing but argue? The searchers will be here soon.
When Anka returns, we will all say.
Is that what Disrupters are bargaining for, the right to kill everyone?
Midro is a child.
The masks can change that.
Return to the digging, Captain.
How long do you plan on keeping me here, providing Midro doesn't kill me, of course?
Until we have help in the mines and our homes are in the clouds.
That's quite a while. Longer than I expected.
We're sealed in!
Completely.
But soon the atmosphere will go. We'll die.
Die from something that can't be seen? You astound me, Vanna. Kirk to Enterprise. Enterprise, come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Enterprise, come in. Kirk to Enterprise.
Spock here. We've been trying to make contact, Captain. Is anything wrong?
Nothing. Are you locked in on me?
Locked in and ready to beam up consignment.
Circumstances dictate a slight variation, Spock.
Standing by for instructions.
Hold on these co-ordinates. Locate the High Advisor and beam him to these co-ordinates immediately. Without advance communication. Repeat, without advance communication. Have you got that, Spock?
Instructions clear. I shall carry them out immediately. Spock out.
You would seal Plasus here also? For what purpose?
I am preparing a demonstration on the effects of unbelieved gas.
Beam the High Advisor down without warning, did he say?
That's not an exact quote, Mister Scott. However, it does express the thought.
I'd like to see the Advisor's face.
You will have that opportunity.
The captain did say immediately, did he not?
Now that is an exact quote, Mister Scott, and I suggest you handle the transporter yourself. This could be very delicate as a problem in transporting for us and in diplomacy for the captain.
Aye.
Something's upsetting you, Droxine.
No, Father.
What is it? Tell me.
No, really. I'm not upset. I was just standing here looking into space and wondering whether or not he would return.
He will never return. I've seen to that.
But the zenite is so important to him. He must have it.
It will be delivered. If we have to kill every Troglyte, it will be delivered.
By that time, it may be too late. Perhaps he does have a method
He knows nothing except how to destroy our power and our society. I forbid you ever to speak of Captain Kirk, or even to think of him.
Transporter room to Mister Spock.
Spock here.
I've locked into the co-ordinates of the Cloud City Council Gallery. Ready to transport the High Advisor.
You'll have to delay.
What's wrong?
Picking up two life-forms in the gallery.
They are inseparably close to one another. We cannot transport one
Without the other.
Did you say the word immediately was an exact quote of the captain's order?
Precisely, Mister Scott.
Well, are we going to do anything about it?
Until the High Advisor is alone or can be isolated, the captain will have to wait. Unless you have an alternative?
I'll give it further thought.
No, I wasn't thinking of Captain Kirk. It's the one with those exquisitely shaped ears. His name is Spock. He's the one I was thinking about. Did you know that he has the most incredibly sensitive hearing? Why, I almost believe that if I stood here and called out to him, he would hear my invitation to come and visit with us for a little while longer.
Oh, he's no better than his friend.
Shall we try?
What is it?
The Disrupter Vanna has disappeared. Her guard was found half unconscious. He'd been attacked by Captain Kirk.
Where is Captain Kirk?
He did not know, sir. He did not regain his senses until I came to his aid.
This is the kind of reason they use to persuade us.
They are desperate.
I will hear no more defence of them.
I'm sure Mister Spock would not behave so.
Leave here at once. Go to your music.
Father, are we so sure of our methods that we never question what we do?
Spock to transporter room.
Scott here.
Lock in on Council Gallery co-ordinates.
Locked in, sir.
Energise.
Aye, sir.
Energising.
How are you doing, Mister Scott?
Fine, Mister Spock. The High Advisor's materialising on the platform.
Beam him down to Captain Kirk immediately.
Energising, sir. He's on his way to the captain.
Good work, Mister Scott.
The Advisor looked mighty angry. I hope he doesn't give the captain too much trouble.
The captain will employ his usual diplomatic balm.
Abduction of a planet official is a serious crime. You will pay for this, I promise you.
Not until you're convinced of the effects of the zenite gas, Mister Advisor.
What effects? I've been here nearly an hour of your Earth time. You and Vanna even longer. I see no changes in any of us!
Perhaps you need closer exposure. Fill that container.
Are you suggesting that I dig zenite?
I insist.
You will indeed pay for this.
You too, Vanna. You too! Dig! Kirk here. What is it?
Contact check, Captain. It has been over an hour since your last communication.
Your orders are to stand by. Now, carry them out! Kirk out.
Standing by, Captain.
However, let me remind you, we have only five hours left to
That is very unlike the captain.
Can the zenite be affecting him?
I grow faint. The oxygen is going.
She's right. Kirk, transport us out of here.
We'll leave when the gas has effect.
It will never take effect. Transport us out of here!
Dig!
Imbecile! We'll die!
I said dig!
I am High Advisor of all the planet. I will take no more orders!
One more step and I'll kill you.
The gas! Captain, you were right. It's taking effect! Captain, you were right!
Are you as brave with mortae as you are with a phaser?
Both will kill.
Enterprise! Enterprise, help! Enterprise!
Enterprise, Spock here.
They'll kill each other. Help us.
Help us! Enterprise!
Enterprise!
Captain, the zenite gas has affected you. Captain! The zenite gas!
The zenite gas.
Look out, Jim!
Well, it seems my little demonstration was quite a success.
I don't like filters, or even masks. I like the word protector much better, don't you?
It is less technical, therefore less accurate, but perhaps more generally descriptive of the function.
It appears you have what you came for after all.
The captain will have his zenite, just as I agreed.
Agreed? There's no such word in the Troglyte vocabulary.
The captain will have his zenite.
No thanks to any agreement by you. It had to be obtained by force.
Because it is the only way we can obtain what is due us.
How about your education? Was that by force?
It served your purpose at the time.
You could have had those filters for all the good it will do you.
They will be very effective. sir. They've been severely tested, and the Troglytes will no longer suffer from retardation and emotional difficulties.
They will all be like her. ungrateful, vindictive.
Yes. Our demands have just begun. Here is the zenite, Captain, just as I promised.
Thank you, Vanna.
Stratos is so pleasant and so beautiful. I think I'm afraid to leave it.
There is great beauty in the knowledge that lies below, and only one way to really experience it.
I shall go to the mines. I no longer wish to be limited to the clouds. Is your planet like this one?
No. No, Vulcan is quite different.
Someday I should like to visit it.
Perhaps some form of mediation can be helpful in your difficulties. The Federation Bureau of Industrialisation may be of aid to you.
I will tolerate absolutely no interference! You will not set foot here as long as I rule!
Believe me, sir, I have neither the time nor the desire to return here. Only answering your charges against me will force me back.
And I shall press them. You are guilty of abduction, Captain!
You're guilty of attacking a starship commander and plotting against his life.
Captain, perhaps both incidents are best forgotten.
Yes, Vanna. They never happened. Mister Advisor? (Plasus nods) Mister Spock, let's get that zenite delivered. I believe we only have three hours left.
Two hours, fifty-nine minutes to be exact, Captain.
Kirk to Enterprise. Kirk to Enterprise. Mister Scott beam us up.
The Savage Curtain
All observation stations, take final readings. This'll be our last orbit.
Spock, any answers?
I still read a suggestion of carbon cycle life forms on the planet surface, Captain.
Which is scientifically impossible under conditions there.
Agreed. Mister Sulu, switch to the planet area I have under observation.
I'm reading it now, Mister Spock. It seems to indicate artificial power being generated in factor seven quantities.
Which would indicate a considerable civilisation there.
What's all this poppycock about life forms on this planet, Spock? The surface is molten lava. The atmosphere is poisonous.
Our readings could be false, Captain, perhaps caused by some natural phenomena.
Well I think Starfleet should forget about those old space legends. There's no intelligent life here.
Lieutenant, anything from the planet?
I've repeatedly tried on every hailing frequency, sir. There's no response on any channel.
Transmit to Starfleet our sensor readings and log entries on the planet. Surface conditions make it impossible for us to beam down and investigate further. We are therefore going on to our next assignment.
Aye, aye, sir.
Completing final orbit, sir.
Prepare to warp us out.
Alert status.
We're being scanned, Captain. A deep probe, incredibly swift.
Jim!
Captain Kirk, I believe. A pleasure to make your acquaintance, sir.
Uhura
No need to check your voice telegraph device. Do I gather that you recognise me?
I recognise what you appear to be.
And appearances can be most deceiving, but not in this case, James Kirk. I am Abraham Lincoln.
Spock.
Fascinating.
I have been described in many ways, Mister Spock, but never with that word.
I was requesting your analysis, Spock.
They did scan us and our vessel, Captain, and doubtless obtained sufficient information to present this illusion.
Illusion? Captain, will you permit me to come aboard your vessel? No doubt you have devices which can check my reality.
We'd be honoured to have you aboard, Mister President.
Do you still measure time in minutes?
We can convert to it, sir.
Then you should be directly over my position in. There. Exactly twelve and one half minutes. Until then, Captain.
(signing a PADD) Thank you, Mister Mulney.
Small change occurring there, Captain.
Magnification four, helm.
Aye, aye, sir.
An area of approximately one thousand square kilometres. It measures completely Earth-like.
Perfect oxygen-nitrogen atmosphere.
He called it to the second, sir. We'll be over it in exactly twelve minutes now.
Security, send a detachment to the transporter room immediately, phaser side arms, and be prepared to give presidential honours.
Jim, do you really believe he's Abraham Lincoln?
It's obvious he believes it. Doctor McCoy, Mister Spock, full dress uniforms.
Full dress? Presidential honours? What is this nonsense, Mister Dickerson?
I understand President Lincoln's coming aboard, sir.
Ha! You're daft, man.
All I know is what the captain tells me, and he says he'll have the hide of the first man that so much as smiles.
I'd have expected sanity from the ship's surgeon, at least. President Lincoln, indeed. No doubt to be followed by Louis of France and Robert the Bruce.
If so, we'll execute appropriate honours to each, Mister Scott.
Aye, sir.
Gentlemen, I don't for a moment believe that President Lincoln is actually coming aboard, but we're dealing with an unknown and apparently highly advanced life-form. Until we know, when in Rome, we'll do as the Romans do.
Bridge to Transporter room. One minute to overhead position.
Locked on to something. Does that appear human to you, Mister Spock?
Fascinating. For a moment, it appeared almost mineral. Like living rock with heavy fore claws. It's settling down now to completely human readings.
We can beam it aboard anytime now, sir.
Doctor McCoy, take tricorder readings and see if it is human. Appropriate ruffles and flourishes, Mister Spock. Security, stand ready.
Phaser team, set ready for a heavy stun.
Band honours ready, Captain.
Energise.
The USS Enterprise is honoured to have you aboard, Mister President.
Strange. Where are the musicians?
That's taped music, sir. A starship on active duty never carries an honour detachment.
Taped music, you say. Well, perhaps Mister Spock will be good enough to explain that to me later. A most interesting way to come aboard, Captain. What was the device used?
An energy-matter scrambler, sir. The molecules in your body are converted into energy, then beamed into this chamber and reconverted back into their original pattern.
Well, since I'm obviously here, and quite whole, whatever you mean apparently works very well indeed. Gentlemen, if those are weapons, please lower them. At my age, I'm afraid I'm not very dangerous.
Human, Jim.
All too human, Doctor McCoy. Happy to make your acquaintance.
Mister President, may I present my officers. Commander Spock, second in command, Engineering Officer Scott and Security Officer Dickerson.
Mister Spock, Mister Scott, Mister Dickerson. Gentlemen, I hope to talk to each of you. But meanwhile, your captain is consumed with questions and I shall do my utmost to answer them. And I trust your duties will permit time to answer some of mine. At your service, Captain.
Lieutenant Dickerson, you and your men may return to quarters. Mister President.
A most interesting vessel.
Just what was it you locked onto before you beamed him aboard?
You heard Mister Spock yourself. Mineral he called it, like living rock.
And that became Lincoln?
I couldn't tell. It may have been another figure down there standing by. What do you make of it?
I'm not quite sure.
Yes, if I recall, your Union Army observation balloons were tendered six hundred or so feet high. We're six hundred and forty three miles above the surface of this planet.
You can measure great distances that closely?
We do, sir. Six hundred forty three miles, two thousand twenty one feet, two point zero four inches at this moment, using your old-style measurements.
Bless me.
Excuse me, Captain Kirk.
Yes, Lieutenant.
Mister Scott
What a charming negress. Oh, forgive me, my dear. I know in my time some used that term as a description of property.
But why should I object to that term, sir? You see, in our century we've learned not to fear words.
May I present our communications officer, Lieutenant Uhura.
The foolishness of my century had me apologising where no offense was given.
We've each learned to be delighted with what we are. The Vulcans learned that centuries before we did.
It is basic to the Vulcan philosophy, sir. The combination of a number of things to make existence worthwhile.
Yes. Philosophy of Nome, meaning all. How did I know that? Just as I seem to know that on the planet surface you will meet one of the greatest living Vulcans in all the long history of your planet. My mind cannot recall his name, but I know he will be there. What is it that powers your vessel, Captain? May I see your engine room?
Certainly. Our engineering officer
Has been waiting in the briefing room for you, sir, for over two hours.
Oh, dear. If you'll forgive me, our communications officer
I would be delighted to have her as guide.
Forgive me again. We'll rejoin you shortly.
Where the devil are they?
Why, they're probably looking up a plate of haggis in the galley. They've been everywhere else.
Sorry to have been delayed, gentlemen.
Jim, I would be the last to advise you on your command image.
I doubt that, Bones, but continue.
Do I have to lay it out for you? Practically the entire crew has seen you treat this impostor like the real thing when he can't possibly be the real article.
Lincoln died three centuries ago on a planet hundreds of light years away.
More that direction, Engineer.
You're the science officer. Why aren't you, well, doing whatever a science officer does at a time like this?
I am, Doctor. I am observing the alien.
At last! At least somebody agrees with us he's an alien.
Yes, of course he's an alien.
Mad. Loony as an Arcturian dogbird.
Gentlemen, as you know, Mister Spock and I have been invited to beam down to the planet surface with him. Any comments on that?
Yes, a big one. Suddenly, miraculously, we see a small spot of Earth-type environment down there. Now is it really there, or do we just think we see it down there?
You might beam down into a sea of molten lava.
But why would he want to kill only two of us?
It would be illogical. With such abilities, they could as easily trick us into destroying the entire vessel.
Are you implying, Mister Spock, that it's probably safe to beam down there?
No, I'm not, Doctor. There's no doubt they want us down there for some hidden purpose. Otherwise, they would have revealed some logical reason for all of this.
Why Lincoln, Spock? Any speculation on that?
Speculation is unnecessary, Captain. The answer is clear. President Lincoln has always been a very personal hero to you. What better way to titillate your curiosity than to make him come alive for you.
But not only to me, Spock.
Agreed. I, too, experienced his charm. It is a magnificent work of duplication.
But he holds a special involvement to you, Jim. I think it's interesting, in as much as you're the one who's going to make the decision whether to beam down or not.
Don't do it, Captain.
The very reason for the existence of our starships is contact with other life. Although the method is beyond our comprehension, we have been offered contact. Therefore, I shall beam down. Mister Spock, as for you
Captain, since I was included in the invitation to make contact, I must beam down with you.
You're both out of your heads!
Aye, sir.
And you're on the edge of insubordination.
Would I be on the edge of insubordination to remind the captain that this smells of something happening to him that I might not be able to patch together again?
Aye!
Gentlemen, your concern is noted and appreciated. Mister Spock, standard dress, tricorders and phasers. We will guide President Lincoln to the transporter room. We'll beam down immediately.
Standing by, Mister Scott.
Transporter room to bridge. Standing by.
We are now locked in synchronous orbit, Mister Scott. Sensors continue to show the area as completely Earth-like in all respects.
If they're wrong and they do beam into a pool of lava
Then they're dead men. I couldna pull them back in time.
All right, Mister Scott, energise.
Scotty.
Captain. Our phasers and tricorders did not beam down with us.
Kirk to Enterprise. Enterprise? Enterprise, come in. Kirk to Enterprise. Enterprise, come in.
Undamaged, yet something is preventing them from functioning.
Come in, landing party. Report. Enterprise to Captain Kirk. Can you read us?
If they're all right, they should've reported in.
Your explanation, sir?
Well, I have none. To me this seems quite as it should be.
Why were our weapons taken? Why can't we communicate with our ship?
Please, believe me. I know nothing other than what I have already told you.
The game is over. We've treated you with courtesy. We've gone along with what and who you think you are.
Despite the seeming contradictions, all is as it appears to be. I am Abraham Lincoln.
Just as I am whom I appear to be.
Surak.
Who?
The greatest of all who ever lived on our planet, Captain. The father of all we became.
(in the captain's chair) All ship's systems going dead. Switch to reserve power. All decks report status.
All decks report status. All decks report status.
Bridge to Engineering. Come in. What's happening to our power? Bridge to Engineering, report.
Everything's out. We've switched to reserve power. Lost all power in the warp engines.
How is it, Mister Sulu?
No answer yet on what caused it. They're standing by.
Shut down all but the most necessary systems.
No damage report, Mister Scott.
No indication of engine damage, sir.
Engage restart cycle.
I can't. I don't understand it.
Start emergency procedures.
Aye, aye, sir.
Live long and prosper, Spock. May you also, Captain Kirk.
It is not logical that you are Surak. There is no fact, extrapolation of fact or theory, which would make possible.
Whatever I am, would it harm you to give response?
Live long and prosper, image of Surak, father of all we now hold true.
The image of Surak read in your face what is in your mind, Spock.
As I turned and my eyes beheld you, I displayed emotion. I beg forgiveness.
The cause was more than sufficient. Let us speak no further of it. In my time, we knew not of Earth men. I am pleased to see that we have differences. May we together become greater than the sum of both of us.
Spock, we'll not go along with these charades any longer.
You'll have an answer soon, Captain. Our world is called Excalbia. Countless who live on that planet are watching. Before this drama unfolds, we give welcome to the ones named Kirk and Spock.
We know nothing of your world or your customs. What do you mean, drama about to unfold?
You're intelligent life form, but I'm surprised you do not perceive the honour we do you. Have we not created in this place on our planet a stage identical to your own world?
We perceive we were invited to come here, and we came in friendship. And you have deprived us of our instruments to examine your world, to defend ourselves, to communicate with our vessel.
Your objection is well taken. We shall communicate with your vessel so your fellow life forms may also enjoy and profit from the play. Behold.
Captain, Mister Spock, some of these you may know through history. Genghis Khan, for one. And Colonel Green, who led a genocidal war early in the 21st century on Earth. Zora, who experimented with the body chemistry of subject tribes on Tiburon. Kahless the Unforgettable, the Klingon who set the pattern for his planet's tyrannies. We welcome the vessel Enterprise
To our solar system and to our spectacle.
At least the captain and Spock are safe.
It's a confrontation of some sort. Those are all figures out of history. Notoriously evil.
We ask you to observe with us
The confrontation of the two opposing philosophies you term good and evil. Since this is our first experiment with Earthlings, our theme is a simple one. Survival, life and death. Your philosophies are alien to us, and we wish to understand them and discover which is the stronger. We learn by observing such spectacles.
What do you mean, survival?
The word is explicit. If you and Spock survive, you return to your vessel. If you do not, your existence is ended.
Can we beam the captain and Spock back up?
We don't have the power. They'll come aboard a mass of dying flesh.
Well, can we send the phasers down?
There's nothing we can do, Doctor. Nothing but watch them. He's skimmed the worst ones in history to face them.
But they're not real, any more than that Lincoln or Surak. What do the sensors read?
As life-forms. They are living beings.
Could they be aliens projecting an illusion?
The readings are those of humanoids.
Why do you hesitate?
Do you wish further clarification? Your choice of action is unlimited, as is your choice of weapons. Should you wish to use any, you may fabricate anything you desire out of what you can find around you. Captain?
Mister Spock and I refuse to participate.
You will decide otherwise.
Analysis, Spock. Why do they want us to fight?
It may be exactly as explained, Captain. Our concept of good and evil is strange to them. Perhaps they wish to determine which is strongest.
And they'll get their answers if it kills us.
I'm afraid none of us may leave, gentlemen, until we do what it demands of us.
Captain Kirk, may I speak with you? I quite agree with your attitude toward this charade. It's ridiculous to think that we should take part in it.
What do you want?
The same thing as you do, to get out of here. I have no quarrel with you any more than you have with me.
You're somewhat different than the way history paints you, Colonel Green.
History tends to exaggerate. I suggest we call a halt to this at once and see if we can't find some way out of our difficulties. My associates are in full agreement with me. Captain, you were tricked into coming here, weren't you? So were we all.
Where do you come from?
I can't remember. Isn't that strange? My memory used to be quite remarkable. Well, wherever it was, I want to get back. So it seems to me, Captain, that we have a common cause, and our enemy is that creature.
What do you propose?
That we combine forces, and reason some way to overcome it.
You were notorious, Colonel Green, for striking at your enemies in the midst of negotiating with them.
But that was centuries ago, Captain, and not altogether true. No, there is much I would change now if I could. Don't let prejudice and rumour sway you.
Captain! How can we warn him?
Anyone hurt?
I fear my clothing is somewhat damaged, but how delightful to discover at my age that I can still wrestle.
Mister Spock?
I'm all right, Captain. However, I suggest that we prepare ourselves for another attack.
No, I think Colonel Green is right. That rock-like thing is our enemy, not those illusions.
For an illusion, my opponent carried a considerable punch. Oh, I forgot. You consider me an illusion too.
The captain speaks wisely. Those four are not our enemy. We should arrive together at a peaceful settlement.
I am disappointed. You display no interest in the honour we do you. We offer you an opportunity to become our teachers by demonstrating whether good or evil is more powerful. You find my body heat distressing, Captain? You forget the nature of this planet. I must conclude that your species requires a cause to fight for. You may now communicate with your ship.
Kirk to Enterprise. Enterprise, come in.
Scott to Engineering. Report, Lieutenant.
Emergency increasing, sir.
Deterioration has just started, sir.
Give me that again, man. I cannot hear you.
Mister Scott, I have the captain.
Scotty, do you read me?
Mister Scott, I have the captain.
Engineering, check for radiation. Get a repair crew on it at once.
We have already, sir. We can't seem to stop it.
Is there a danger of detonation?
Estimating four hours, sir.
Red Alert, Captain. Mister Scott is standing by.
What caused the red alert?
I don't know yet, sir.
Captain.
Scotty, beam us up fast.
I cannot. We have a complete power failure.
We're on emergency battery power only.
What happened?
I can't explain it, sir, but the matter and antimatter are in red zone proximity.
What caused that?
There's no knowing and there's no stopping it either. The shielding is breaking down. I estimate four hours before it goes completely. Four hours before the ship blows up.
The estimate is quite correct. Your ship will blow itself to bits within four hours, Captain, unless you defeat the others before then. Is that cause enough to fight for?
What if they defeat us?
To save your ship and your crew, you have to win.
Scotty, inform Starfleet Command. Disengage nacelles, Jettison if possible. Mister Spock, assist them. Advise and analyse. Scotty? Scotty?
Your communicators no longer function, Captain. You may proceed with the spectacle.
James, the war is forced upon us. History repeats itself.
Did you set the traps?
Yes.
What did you find out? What are they doing?
They've done nothing. They've not armed themselves nor prepared for any kind of defence. I say attack now and finish them.
With what? These? (pointed sticks)
Better than what they have.
No, it's not advantage enough. I want to make sure the odds are in our favour. Overwhelm and devastate, that's the way to get power and to hold it, and I mean to do that.
There's nothing immoral about fighting an illusion, Mister Spock. We play their game, fight, or lose the ship and all the crewmen aboard.
And if they're real, Captain?
We'll use this as a base. It's defensible. They can't approach without being seen.
Are we fighting a defensive war, James?
No, we don't have time. But if things go against us, I want a place to retreat to. What I want to do now is scout them out, find their weaknesses and attack.
Do you drink whiskey?
Occasionally. Why?
Because you have qualities very much like those of another man I admire greatly. General Grant.
Thank you. Thank you. Mister Spock, we'll need weapons. I believe the ancient Vulcans made something like a boomerang?
Yes, Captain.
And slings and spears. Slings. Mister President. You used a sling as a boy.
Indeed I did.
Captain. Logic dictates that we consider another course.
We don't have much time, Spock.
In my time on Vulcan, we also faced these same alternatives. We'd suffered devastating wars which nearly destroyed our planet. Another was about to begin. We were torn. But out of our suffering some of us found the discipline to act. We sent emissaries to our opponents to propose peace. The first were killed, but others followed. Ultimately we achieved peace, which has lasted since then.
Circumstances were different then, Surak.
The face of war has never changed, Captain. Surely it is more logical to heal than kill.
I'm afraid that kind of logic doesn't apply here.
That is precisely why we should not fight.
My ship is at stake.
I will not harm others, Captain.
His convictions are most profound in this matter, Captain.
So are mine, Spock. If I believed that there was a peaceful way out of this
The risk will be mine alone. If I fail, you lose nothing. After all, I'm no warrior.
The captain knows that I have fought at his side before and will do so now, if need be. However, I too, am a Vulcan, bred to peace. Let him attempt it.
You saw how treacherously they acted.
Oh, yes. But perhaps it's our belief in peace that is actually being tested.
I have no authority over you. You may do as you think best.
Thank you. May you live long and prosper.
The weapons, gentlemen. In case he fails.
Colonel!
No. Let's hear what he has to say. We may find it useful. Stop there, Vulcan. State your purpose.
I come in peace to propose peace.
Are you surrendering?
One of those peace lovers, Colonel.
Why are you doing this? Do you speak for the others?
No, I speak for myself because I abhor violence. But if you accept the solution I offer, they, too, will accept it.
How can I be sure? I think you're trying to trick me, Vulcan. I think that while you're here talking peace, the others are preparing to attack.
No, Colonel. They are at their base awaiting an answer.
How can I believe that? No one talks peace unless he's ready to back it up with war.
He talks peace if it is the only way to live.
Then tell me, what do you have to gain if we accept?
Nothing but the knowledge that I have done what I believe in.
What do I get out of it? I fight for gain, Vulcan. What do I gain here?
Your life and the lives of the others. You said yourself, Colonel, that we have common cause to survive. Together we can. But not by warring.
Why don't we kill him?
No. He's our means to finish them all.
Colonel, surely you accept the logic of this. What is your answer?
You're very persuasive, Vulcan. I'd like to come out of this with a whole skin. Perhaps I can convince my associates that it would be to their advantage also.
Your Surak is a brave man.
Men of peace usually are, Captain. On Vulcan, he is revered as the father of our civilisation. The father image holds much meaning for us.
You show emotion, Spock.
I deeply respect what he has accomplished.
I hope he accomplishes something here, and soon.
Surak?
Help me, Spock! Spock, help me!
Mister Spock, your friend wants you. He seems to be hurt.
Spock! Help me, Spock! Spock! Help me!
You can't let him suffer.
They're trying to goad us into attacking, Captain. They expect us to act rashly.
Yes, I know that.
Help me, Spock!
He was aware of what might happen when he went.
I should never have let him go.
You had no choice, Captain. You could not have stopped him.
How can you ignore that?
A Vulcan would not cry out so.
Whether he's a Vulcan or not, he's in agony.
I am not insensitive to it, Captain.
Help me, Spock!
But you can just listen to it and do nothing. I can't.
Captain, that is what they are waiting for. They're waiting for us to attempt a rescue.
I can't just let him stay there.
Perhaps we can rescue him, Mister Spock. Now, I suggest that we do whatever they want.
Do what they want, sir?
Not the way they want it, however. We must first convince them that they have provoked us to recklessness. James, I do not mean to presume upon your authority. What I propose is that I circle around to their rear while you two provide a frontal assault. It should be sufficiently violent to cover whatever I do.
And what will you do?
Why, slip into their camp and free him.
No.
James, James. Remember, I was something of a backwoodsman. I doubt that you could do what I was bred to.
I can't let you risk it, Mister President.
I am no longer president. Mister Spock, any comment?
Help me, Spock!
No, sir.
One matter further, gentlemen. We fight on their level. With trickery, brutality, finality. We match their evil. I know, James. I was reputed to be a gentle man. But I was commander in chief during the four bloodiest years of my country's history. I gave orders that sent a hundred thousand men to their death at the hands of their brothers. There is no honourable way to kill, no gentle way to destroy. There is nothing good in war except its ending. And you are fighting for the lives of your crew.
Your campaign, Mister President.
They should be coming soon.
Zora! Kahless! No, wait!
How many do you see?
Two.
Zora.
Surak.
Surak, the others have drawn them away. We will circle around. It was a worthy effort, Surak. Worthy. No need to blame yourself before its failure.
(as Surak) Help me, Spock. Help me, Spock.
Now can you cry like Lincoln?
(as Lincoln) Help me, Kirk. Help me, Kirk!
Mister Lincoln!
James, stay back.
You are the survivors. The others have run off. It would seem that evil retreats when forcibly confronted. However, you have failed to demonstrate to me any other difference between your philosophies. Your good and your evil use the same methods, achieve the same results. Do you have an explanation?
You established the methods and the goals.
For you to use as you chose.
What did you offer the others if they won?
What they wanted most. Power.
You offered me the lives of my crew.
I perceive you have won their lives.
How many others have you done this to? What gives you the right to hand out life and death?
The same right that brought you here. The need to know new things.
We came in peace.
And you may go in peace.
Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Is that you, Captain? Are you all right?
Yes, Mister Sulu. We're all right. You may beam us aboard.
Mister Scott, report.
The ship is functioning normally again, sir, and the restart cycle is in operation. You'd never know anything had been out of order. I can't fathom it.
Mister Sulu.
We should be on warp power within thirty minutes, sir.
Good. Mister Chekov.
The deterioration in the shielding has stopped and is reversing itself. I have no explanation.
Thank you, Mister Chekov. Mister Spock, any explanation?
Conjecture, Captain, rather than explanation.
Well?
It would seem that we were held in the power of creatures able to control matter and to rearrange molecules in whatever fashion was desired. So they were able to create images of Surak and Lincoln after scanning our minds and using their fellow creatures as source matter.
They seemed so real. And to me, especially Mister Lincoln. I feel I actually met Lincoln.
Yes, and Surak. Perhaps in a sense they were real, Captain. Since they were created out of our own thoughts, how could they be anything but what we expected them to be?
It was so hard for me to see him die again. I feel I understand what Earth must have gone through to achieve final peace.
Captain Kirk, the planet has resumed its normal appearance.
There's still so much of their work to be done in the galaxy, Spock. Mister Sulu, break us out of orbit and continue to our next assignment.
Aye, aye, sir.
All Our Yesterdays
The power source we detected is in this building, Captain.
Any sign of survivors?
No signs of sapient life forms.
How can a planet full of people just disappear?
If they knew that their sun was dying, it could be anything up to mass suicide.
Reports deny that they had any space flight capability. This appears to be an archive or library of some kind.
Then we're certainly in the right place to find out what happened, where the inhabitants are, and if there are any left now.
Well, that's fine. Where do we start?
May I help you? I am the librarian. May I be of assistance?
Perhaps you can, Mister
Mister Atoz. I confess that I'm a little surprised to see you. I had thought that everyone had long since gone. But the surprise is pleasant one. After all, a library serves no purpose unless someone is using it.
You say everyone is gone? Where'd they go?
It depended on the individual, of course. If you wish to trace a specific person, I'm sorry, but that information is confidential.
No, no particular person, just people in general. Where did they go?
Ah, you find it difficult to choose, is that it? Yes, a wide range of alternatives is a mixed blessing, but perhaps I can help. Would you step this way, please?
May I help you? You may select from more than twenty thousand verism tapes, several hundred of which have only recently been added to the collection. I'm sure you'll find something here that pleases you. You, sir, what is your particular field of interest?
What about recent history?
Really? Oh, that's too bad. We have so little on recent history. There was no demand for it.
It doesn't have to be extensive, Just the answers to a few questions.
Of course. Reference services available at the desk.
You're very late. Where have you been?
You're a very agile man, Mister Atoz. Just how many of you are there? We came as soon as we knew what was happening.
Forgive me, sir. It is my fault. I must have miscalculated. Our readings indicated that there was no one here at all.
Of course I know. Everyone on this planet was warned of the coming nova long ago. They followed instructions and are now safe. And you had better do the same.
Did you say they were safe?
Absolutely. Every single one.
Where did they go?
Wherever they wanted to go, of course. It is strictly up to the individual's choice.
I see. And you personally sent all these people on the planet to safety?
Yes, yes, yes. They are all gone, except you three. Of course, I had to delegate the simple tasks to my replicas.
You are the real one, Mister Atoz?
Of course. I am the real Mister Atoz.
As a matter of fact, he's quite real, Jim.
Let us take you with us to a place of safety.
No, thank you. I plan to join my wife and family when the time comes. Now, don't be concerned about me. Think of yourselves. I warn you most urgently. Make your escape before it's too late. The library is at your complete service. I will gladly supply you with all reference material to help you. History of the planet is available in every detail. Just choose what interests you the most. The millennium, the century, the date, the moment. The library is your key. (puts a disc in a reader) Oh! It's in the wrong file. Make your own selection, but remember, you're very late.
We'll choose it as quick as we can. How long till nova?
Three hours, thirteen minutes.
This gentleman is not
You, sir. I think you'll find something interesting over here.
Now, if these won't do, I can bring you another file.
Have you made your selection, sir?
Exactly what is it that I'm expected to select?
I'm sure I was clear. The period in which you're interested.
I see. This is a fascinating machine. What is it?
Ah, this is the atavachron.
Interesting nomenclature. How does it work? May I
Oh, no, sir, no. I must ask you not to touch the controlling mechanism. Return and make your selection. When you have chosen, I will prepare you through the atavachron.
Thank you, Mister Atoz.
Wait! I haven't prepared you.
You must be prepared!
What is this place?
Yes, and where is the captain?
You dirty thing. Let go of me!
Vile vixen!
Come when you are bidden, slave! (Kirk pushes him down) You need a lesson in how to use your betters. Who's your master?
I'm a free man, sir.
Heating this boulder may provide some temporary heat.
What's wrong?
Something's preventing my phaser from operating.
Oh, thank you, man. I thought I'd be limbered sure when that gull caught me cutting his purse.
What's that? Are you all right?
Oh, I took you to be an angler, but you're none of us, are ya? Well, you're a bully fine coe for all of that. What a handsome dish ya served them, the coxcombs.
You better come back with me to the library. You'll be safe there. Doctor McCoy can see to those bruises.
I'm game, love. Lead and I'll follow. Where's library?
It's right over there.
Where's the captain, Spock? We were right behind him.
What's with you, man? Let's make off before coxcombs come with shoulder clappers. 
No. Do you remember when you first saw me? Do you remember whether I came through some kind of door?
Oh, I think the rum gull must've kicked you in the head. Come on, love. I know a leech who'll ask no questions.
No. No. It must be here someplace.
Jim!
Jim, can you hear us?
Bones? Spock?
Captain, we hear you, but we cannot see you.
Are you all right?
We must've missed each other somehow.
Agreed.
Apparently they've all escaped the destruction of their world by retreating into its past.
Mercy on us. It's spirits.
No, no. No, no, no. These are friends of mine, and they're
Spock, are you in the library?
Indeed not. We're in a wilderness of arctic characteristics.
He means it's cold.
Can you get to the library?
There is no library, Captain, at least not that we can see. We are at the base of an ice cliff.
Explain.
Just before you disappeared, Captain, I discovered a machine which Mister Atoz called the atavachron.
It must have been tied in to the tape viewer somehow.
Opening time portals to the past. You cross through into the period which you were viewing.
I was looking over some material about their Ice Age.
I am here, evidently, because I stepped through at the same instant as Doctor McCoy.
Yes. (a mob approaches) My friends are coming back with reinforcements.
There's the mort's accomplice. Arrest him.
We are the law, and do require that you yield to us.
On what charge?
Thievery and purse cutting.
That's a mistake. I'm no thief.
What's happening?
Lord help us. What's that?
It's spirits.
Away. Away, spirit, and let honest men approach.
Keep talking!
Captain!
They speak at his bidding. Stop his mouth and they'll quiet.
You must be close to the portal.
Jim, what's the matter? Jim sounded like he was in trouble.
We may be in trouble ourselves. We must find shelter.
In this severe cold, we cannot survive much longer.
Leave me here, Spock.
We go together or not at all.
Don't be a fool. My hands and face are frostbitten. I can't feel my feet. Alone you have a chance. Now do what I say. Go try to find Jim.
We go together.
You stubborn, thickheaded Vulcan!
He's suffering from the severity of your weather. Unfortunately, he is the doctor, not I. I'll avoid giving him any medication at this time. Perhaps, if he's kept quiet and warm, he may recover naturally. It is agreeably warm here.
What are you called?
I'm called Spock.
Even your name is strange. Forgive me. I've never seen anyone who looks like you. Why are you here? Are you prisoners too?
Prisoners?
This is one of the places Zor Kahn sends people when he wants them to disappear. Didn't you come in through the time portal?
Yes, we came through the time portal, but not as prisoners. We were sent here by mistake.
The atavachron is far away, but I think you come from someplace farther than that.
That is true. I am not from the world you know at all. My home is a planet millions of light years away.
Oh, how wonderful! I've always loved books about such possibilities. But they are only stories. This isn't real. I must be imagining all this. I'm going mad!
Listen to me. I am firmly convinced that I do exist. I am substantial. You are not imagining this.
Oh, I've been here for so long, alone. When I saw you out there, I couldn't believe it. Is he dying?
Here. There's the mort. And there's the mort's henchman.
Open up. Rouse him.
You're the thief who talks to spirits.
I'm a stranger.
Where are you from?
An island.
What is this island?
It's called Earth.
I know no island Earth. No matter. Continue.
I never saw that woman before tonight. When she screamed, as far as I could tell, she was being attacked.
Then you deny being her accomplice?
Yes, I deny it. I was reading in the library when I heard her scream. My lord, the library? Do you remember where the library is, my lord?
Perhaps your part in this is innocent. I believe you to be an honest man.
He's a witch!
Take care, woman. I am convinced of your guilt. Do not compound it with false accusation.
He speaks to unseen spirits. He's a witch! You heard the voices!
It's truth, my lord. I heard the spirit talk to him. He answered and did call it Bones.
You're a witch. He cast a spell. He made me steal against my wish.
Surely you don't believe
You heard these spirits?
Aye, my lord. I'll witness to it.
What he heard, my lord, were only my friends behind the wall in the library. In the library.
I know nothing of this. Send for someone learned in witchcraft and let him examine him. I will have nothing to do with it.
My lord, at least arrange for me to meet Mister Atoz.
I know of no Atoz.
Yes! Yes! Atoz!
I know nothing of this, nothing of these matters! I will not hear him!
Let me speak to you!
I will not hear him.
At least let me talk to you!
Witch! Witch! Witch! They'll burn ya.
McCoy. McCoy, wake up.
Who are you?
My name is Zarabeth.
Zarabeth. Spock, are we in the library?
No, we are still in the Ice Age, but safe for the moment.
Jim. What about Jim?
Doctor, you're in no condition to get up. You lie down and rest. I shall attempt to find the captain.
You find him, Spock. Don't you worry about me. You just find him.
Spock, who is this Jim?
He's our commanding officer and our friend.
I saw only the two of you. I did not know there was another.
He did not come with us. He was sent through the time portal to another period in history much later than this one. If I am to find him, there is only one possible avenue. Zarabeth, will you show me where the time portal is?
But your friend. He is ill.
Yes, that is true. If I leave him, there's a chance he may never regain the ship. He would then be marooned in this time period. But he is no longer in danger of death, so my primary duty to him has been discharged. If I remain here, no one of our party would be able to aid Captain Kirk.
You make it sound like an equation.
It should be an equation. I should be able to resolve this problem logically. Perhaps it has something to do with the atavachron. If only I knew more about how it worked. Zarabeth, you said that you were brought here as a prisoner. May I ask
Why? My crime was in choosing my kinsmen unwisely. Two of them were involved in a conspiracy to kill Zor Kahn.
I remember that name from the history tapes in the library. Zor Kahn the Tyrant.
It was not enough that he execute my kinsmen. Zor Kahn determined to destroy our entire family. He used the atavachron to send us places no one could ever find us.
Zarabeth, I must return to Mister Atoz and the atavachron. We will carry Doctor McCoy, and you must come with us. I will send you and the doctor to the ship, and I shall search for Captain Kirk.
I can't go through the portal again. If I do, I will die.
You cannot go back?
None of us can go back. When we come through the portal, we are changed by the atavachron. That is its function. Our basic cell structure is adjusted to the time we enter. You can't go back. If you go through the portal again, you will die by the time you reach the other side.
(standing) Spock? Where are we?
You are safe here, McCoy.
Yes, I remember you.
Come, Doctor, back to bed.
Why are you still here, Spock? Why aren't you looking for Jim?
It is impossible to look for him, Doctor. We cannot go back.
What do you mean impossible? We've got to get back.
Zarabeth explained it to me. When we came through the time portal, it altered our physiological structure. If we attempt to return to the library, we shall die.
Are you trying to tell me that we're trapped here?
Yes, Doctor, we are trapped. Just as Jim is trapped wherever he is.
No supper for you, love. (lets the wench out of her cell) Come on. Up you go.
Cry out and I'll break it. Don't move.
Jailor! Jailor!
I'm being falsely accused. You know that.
You will come with me before the inquisitional tribunal. There the matter of your witchcraft will be decided.
There are no such things as witches!
Jailor! That is sacrilege. If they hear you, they will burn you for such beliefs.
You're the only one that can hear me, and that's the truth. There are no witches. Why do you deny it?
Do not let them hear you. There are witches! There are! You yourself may be discovered to be a witch by the inquisitor. No! What are you doing? No!
Help! Help!
I'll denounce you to the inquisitor. You came here from the future just as I did. Therefore, you, too, are a witch.
I beg you. Do not implicate me. They would burn me.
Then help me.
I will do everything I can to prove you innocent. I will disprove all the charges of witchcraft. But you must never again speak to the comrades you left behind.
Help me return to the library. I've lost my way. I must get back there.
You cannot get back.
I tell you I must! I had two friends with me, who are lost in another time period. I must find them. You'll come back with us.
We can never go back. We must live out our lives here in the past. The atavachron has prepared our cell structure and our brain patterns to make life natural here. To return to the future would mean instant death.
Prepared? I was not prepared. Your Mister Atoz did not prepare me in any way.
Then you must get back at once! If you were not transformed, you can only survive for a few hours here in the past. Come. Hurry. Hurry.
Zarabeth, you are a beautiful cook. Have you ever been told that?
Not recently.
Oh, well, you'll find that Spock is quite delinquent in those matters.
I hadn't noticed it.
Oh? Well, now that I'm feeling better, you'll notice a distinct difference in our approach.
Really?
It's something to look forward to. I think you must be well enough, Doctor, to try the few delicacies this climate has to offer.
No, not yet.
At your rate of progress, it will be soon, I can see.
Doctor McCoy is making excellent progress.
And Mister Spock has been practicing medicine without a license. Don't let him doctor you. I'm the doctor around here.
And known as the worst patient in the entire crew of the Enterprise.
I wonder where she is.
Five thousand years in the future.
Thank you.
I wonder where Jim is.
Who knows. We can only hope that he is well, wherever he is.
What do you mean, we can only hope? Haven't you done anything about it?
What was there to do?
Locate the portal. It can't be too far.
We've been through all that, Doctor. What's the point of rehashing that subject? We can't get back. Wasn't that clear to you?
Yes, that was clear to me.
Then perhaps you were too ill to understand what can't get back means.
I don't believe it, Spock. It's just not like you to give up trying.
Then I'll repeat it for you. Get this through your head. We can't get back. That means we are trapped here in this planet's past just as we are, and we'll stay here for the rest of our lives. Now do you understand?
Yes, I understand. I never thought I'd hear it, but I understand. You want to stay here. As a matter of fact, you're highly motivated to stay in this forsaken waste.
The prospect appeared quite attractive to you a moment ago.
You listen to me, you pointed-eared Vulcan.
I don't like that. I don't think I ever did, and now I'm sure.
What's happening to you, Spock?
Nothing that shouldn't have happened long ago.
Long ago. Of course. Long ago.
This is where it is. I can't remember the exact spot.
That's it! That is the portal. I cannot wait any longer.
Spock? McCoy? Kirk to Enterprise. Come in.
Scott here, Captain.
How much time before the sun blows up?
Seventeen minutes. You three had better come back right away.
We can't, Scotty. Spock and McCoy are missing.
I knew there was trouble. I've got a landing party standing by.
No. Under no circumstances send anyone else here without my orders. Prepare to warp out and stand by. Kirk out. Mister Atoz, where are you?
May I help you? It's you. You're lucky you found your way back here. Now let me process you through the atava
No. Mister Atoz, my friends and I are from another planet. We don't belong in your history. We don't belong on your planet at all.
Just let me take care of you and get you back where you belong.
No. I want to find the exact disc that they were viewing.
Please, go back!
I'm sorry, Mister Atoz. Mister Atoz!
I must prepare to escape.
I'll let you out in a minute. Still up to your little game of replicas? Which are you this time, real or not?
You are evidently a suicidal maniac. I don't understand what you're trying to do, but if you continue, both of us will die. and I for one, do not wish death.
If you help me, we won't die. I promise you that.
I don't trust you.
Which one are you now, the replica or the real one?
I am the real Atoz. You've done away with my replicas. I regret what I must now do.
You don't really want to hurt me, do you? You've been trying to save my life. I realise that. Put that thing away.
I cannot pretend to be sorry that you are here, though I realise it is a misfortune for you. I'm here against my will too, just as you are.
I'm sorry. I know of no way to return you to your own time.
It's not that I wish to return. This is my time now. I've had to face that. But it has been lonely here. Do you know what it's like to be alone? Really alone?
Yes. I know what it is like.
I believe you do. Have something to eat, please.
If it pleases you. This is animal flesh?
There's not much else to eat around here, I'm afraid.
Naturally, because of the climate. What is the source of heat in the shelter?
There's an underground hot spring.
Excellent. Then it will be possible to build a greenhouse of sorts. Meanwhile, this will have to do as the only source of nourishment.
There aren't many luxuries around here. Zor Kahn only left me what was necessary to survive.
But he evidently intended that you continue living.
Yes. He gave me weapons, a shelter, food. Everything I needed to live except companionship. He did not want it said that he had me killed. But to send me here alone, if that is not death, what is? A very inventive mind, that man.
But insensitive, to send such a beautiful woman into exile. The cold must've affected me more than I realised. Please pay no attention. I'm not myself. I'm behaving disgracefully. I have eaten animal flesh and I have enjoyed it. What is wrong with me? I tell you you're beautiful. But you are beautiful. Is it so wrong to tell you so?
I have longed to hear you say it.
You are beautiful. More beautiful than any dream of beauty I've ever known.
Just stay where you are, sir. I'll see you get to safety.
Now, you're going to help me look for my friends.
You're a most determined man.
Kirk here.
What's happening? Why are you waiting?
No time to explain. Are you ready to warp out?
Aye, Captain.
Stand by to beam us up. But when that star explodes, don't wait. Get out fast. Kirk out. Now we're going to start looking. They were in a frozen waste. I could hear the wind.
All right, all right. All right! It must be the Sarpeidon Ice Age, five thousand years ago. Let me look.
We'll both look, Mister Atoz.
Spock. You've been dishonest with me, Spock, and that is also something new for you.
I've given you the facts, Doctor.
The facts as you know them. Or did you just accept Zarabeth's word because it's what you wanted to believe?
You were told the truth. If Zarabeth is the source, what difference does it make?
Zarabeth is a woman condemned to a terrible life of loneliness. She would do anything to anybody to change that. Wouldn't you, Zarabeth?
I told you what I know.
Did you? You said we can't get back. The truth is you can't get back.
She would not jeopardise other lives.
She would do anything to prevent that life of loneliness. She would lie. She would cheat. She would even murder me, the captain, the entire crew of the Enterprise to keep you here with her. Go ahead, Zarabeth, tell Spock the truth. Go ahead. Tell Spock you would kill!
What are you doing to her?
Are you trying to kill me, Spock? Is that what you really want? Think. What are you feeling? Rage? Jealousy? Have you ever had those feelings before?
This is impossible. Impossible. I am a Vulcan.
The Vulcan you knew won't exist for another five thousand years. Think, man. What's happening on your planet right now, this very moment?
My ancestors are barbarians. Warlike barbarians.
Who nearly killed themselves off with their own passions. Spock, you're reverting into your ancestors five thousand years before you were born!
I've lost myself. I do not know who I am. Can we go back?
I don't know. I only know that I can't go back.
I know I'm going to try, Spock, because my life is back there, and I want that life.
Do you think that's the right one?
I don't know.
If we're to get the portal set for the proper time period, you must be specific.
I didn't see it.
Well try calling out.
Bones? Spock! McCoy! You've got the wrong one.
Please, there's no time left. Let me go.
Try again.
There's no portal here, Doctor. It's hopeless.
I suppose you're right.
You're too ill to remain out here any longer. Give it up.
Bones. Spock!
It's Jim! Here we are, Jim.
I've found them. Can you still hear me?
We hear you perfectly, Captain.
Follow my voice.
Spock, McCoy, follow my voice. Do you hear me? Keep following my voice. Spock. McCoy. 
This must be it.
What are you waiting for? Hurry!
Come on, Spock.
You start ahead, Doctor. I do not wish to part from you.
I cannot come. If I go back, I will die.
What are you waiting for? Hurry!
How much time do we have?
Scotty, how much time is there?
You've got to come aboard now.
Come on, Spock, now!
Something's wrong.
What's the matter? Why can't he get through?
I don't know. Unless, it's because they originally went through the portal together.
Spock, McCoy, you can't get through unless you both come back at the same time. Scotty.
Orders or no, I'm beaming you up first.
No! Wait!
Spock, McCoy, hurry through the portal. Time is running out.
He had his escape planned. I'm glad he made it. Kirk to Enterprise.
There's no further need to observe me, Doctor. As you can see, I've returned to the present in every sense.
But it did happen, Spock.
Yes, it happened. But that was five thousand years ago. And she is dead now. Dead and buried. Long ago.
Scotty, are you there?
Now or never, Captain.
Beam us aboard and go to maximum warp as soon as we're there. Kirk out.
Turnabout Intruder
What's wrong with her?
Exposure to radiation.
What form of radiation was it?
Nothing I've ever encountered.
Janice, you must remain absolutely quiet. Those are doctor's orders, not mine.
Captain. Tricorder picking up very faint life readings. Approximately seven hundred metres from here. Help will have to be immediate.
Perhaps your presence will quiet her.
I hoped I wouldn't see you again.
I don't blame you.
The year we were together at Starfleet is the only time in my life I was alive.
I never stopped you from going on with your space work.
Your world of starship captains doesn't admit women. It isn't fair.
No, it isn't. And you punished and tortured me because of it.
I loved you. We could've roamed among the stars.
We'd have killed each other.
It might have been better.
You had your chance, Captain Kirk. You should've smothered the life in me. Then they would have said Doctor Janice Lester died of radiation poisoning in the line of duty. Why didn't you do it? You always wanted to. Didn't you? You had the strength to do it. But you were afraid. You were always afraid. Now Janice Lester takes the place of Captain Kirk. I already possess your physical strength. Only this Captain Kirk is not afraid to kill. Now you know the indignity of being a woman. For you this agony will soon pass, as it has for me. Quiet. Quiet! Believe me, it's better to be dead than to live alone in the body of a woman. It's better to be dead.
Doctor McCoy, your report.
We were too late, Jim. There's nothing could be done.
Was it radiation as suggested?
No, I believe it was celebium. However, Doctor Coleman disagrees. To be specific is essential because the treatment of celebium is quite
Doctor McCoy.
Did you notice any unusual symptoms while we were gone?
No, nothing at all. She was unconscious all of the time.
Doctor Lester is near death.
Perhaps the shock of knowing what happened to her staff is part of her problem.
I'm sure it is.
Beaming her up to the Enterprise will be less harmful than waiting.
I don't know. I'm not sure.
Captain Kirk to the Enterprise. Captain Kirk to the Enterprise.
Mister Scott, sir.
Mister Scott. Prepare to beam the landing party aboard plus two others. One critically ill. Have a medical team standing by to receive the patient. Captain Kirk, out. Prepare to beam aboard.
Doctor Coleman, accompany the patient to the Sickbay. Mister Spock, take the ship out of orbit. Resume designated course. Doctor McCoy. Doctor McCoy, you and Doctor Coleman seem to disagree on diagnosis.
No, not entirely. We both agree it's radiation. Doctor Coleman isn't prepared to say what form of radiation.
Will it affect your arriving at a correct treatment?
It's crucial.
Well, this is especially disturbing to me for personal reasons.
Oh? I didn't know you knew her that well.
Oh, yes. It's been a long time since I saw her. I walked out on her when it became serious.
Well, you must have been very young at the time, Jim.
Youth doesn't excuse everything, Doctor McCoy. It's a very unhappy memory for me.
I didn't realise that. I shall do everything in my power.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Doctor Lester is certainly a very lucky young person to have escaped.
Yes, very lucky. Very lucky.
It just began.
Well you'd better put a stop to it! If you allow Doctor Lester to become fully conscious she'll know what has happened.
Probably no one will believe it.
Probably?
That's all we can ask for. How can death be explained now?
I tell you it can't continue.
You killed every one of the staff. You sent them where you knew the celebium shielding was weak. Now why didn't you kill him? You had the perfect opportunity.
There wasn't enough time.
I gave you every minute you asked for.
He hung onto life too hard. I couldn't
You couldn't because you love him. You want me to be his murderer.
Love? Him? I love the life he led. The power of a starship commander. It's my life now.
I won't become a murderer.
You are a murderer! You knew it was celebium. You could've treated them for it. You're a murderer many times over.
Jim, what are you doing here?
I thought my presence might quiet Doctor Lester. It seems to have had the opposite effect.
It has nothing to do with you. It's a symptom of the developing radiation illness.
Tests with the ship's equipment shows no signs of internal radiation damage, Doctor Coleman.
Didn't Doctor Lester's staff become delirious before they went off and died?
Yes, Captain. Yes.
Doctor Lester could be suffering from a phaser stun as far as the symptoms I can detect, Jim.
Doctor Coleman, Doctor McCoy has had a great deal of experience with radiation exposure on board the Enterprise. I am guided by his opinion.
Doctor Lester and her staff have been under my supervision for two years. If you don't follow my recommendations, responsibility for her health or her death will be yours.
Doctor McCoy, I'm sorry, but I'm going to have to take you off the case and turn it over to Doctor Coleman.
You can't do this! On this ship my medical authority is final!
Doctor Coleman wants to assume the full responsibility. Let him do it.
I won't allow it.
It's done! Doctor Coleman, your patient. Doctor Coleman, didn't you suggest a sedation to rest the patient?
Yes, Captain.
It's not necessary, Jim. Can't you see she's coming around?
Doctor Coleman.
Nurse, administer the sedative.
A sedative is not wise at this time, Captain.
Nurse Chapel, you have your orders.
Nurse Chapel, follow your instructions.
Oh no. Am I really losing command of the Enterprise? No. Oh, no. Bad dream. Bad dream.
James Kirk is returning to consciousness in the body of Janice Lester. The Enterprise is proceeding to its next mission, on the course set before I took over command. Now the years I spent studying every single detail of the ship's operation will be tested. With a little experience, I will be invulnerable to suspicion. At last I attain what is my just due. Command of a starship. All the months of preparation now come to fruition.
Course, Mister Chekov.
One two seven mark eight.
Mister Sulu, set speed at warp factor two.
Warp factor two, sir.
Mister Chekov, plot a course for the Benecia Colony.
Direct course to Benecia, three seven three mark eight.
How long to the colony at our present speed?
Forty-eight hours, sir.
Mister Sulu, set course for the colony. Three seven three mark eight.
Aye, sir. Three seven three mark eight.
Captain, that will delay our work at Beta Aurigae. It means reversing course.
Yes, it can't be helped. We must take Doctor Lester to a place where she can be treated.
May I point out that Starbase Two is on the direct route to our destination.
How long to Starbase Two?
Seventy two hours, Captain.
It's twenty four hours too long. Doctor Lester's condition is increasingly serious. Continue present course.
Aye, sir.
If the diagnosis of Doctor Lester's illness is the critical problem, then the Benecia Colony is definitely not the place for her. Their medical facilities are the most primitive.
They will have to serve.
Starbase Two is fully equipped and staffed with the necessary specialists to determine exactly what is wrong with the doctor. Is that not crucial to your decision?
Thank you, Mister Spock, but the facilities will be of little use if Doctor Lester's dead. Time is of the essence. Continue present course.
At maximum speed, Starbase Two would still meet the emergency.
Captain, shall I advise Starfleet Command of the change of plan?
No change of plan has been ordered, Lieutenant. Our arrival at Beta Aurigae will merely be delayed. Our gravitational studies of that binary system will not suffer, and a life may be saved! That is not unusual procedure for the Enterprise.
Sir, I believe Starfleet will have to be notified that our rendezvous with the starship Potemkin will not take place as scheduled.
Mister Spock, if you'd concentrate on the areas for which you are responsible, Starfleet Command would've been informed already.
Since the captain usually deals with Starfleet in these matters, I assumed that my suggestions might be deemed interference.
Inform Starfleet of the delay, Lieutenant.
Aye, sir.
Continue present course. Increase speed to warp factor six.
I'll let my record speak for me.
Why are you being so defensive? There's no implied criticism of you in my order to remove you from the case.
That is not the reason I'm here. I'm here because Doctor Coleman's record states that he's incompetent.
That's the opinion of an individual.
No, sir. That is the opinion of Starfleet Command. I checked with them. Doctor Coleman was removed from his post as Chief Medical Officer of his ship for administrative incompetence.
There are no administrative duties required here.
As well as flagrant medical blunders.
Promotions and demotions can be politically manoeuvred. You know that, Bones.
Not in Starfleet Headquarters, Captain. And certainly not in the Surgeon General's office.
I'm afraid the order will have to stand. I can only say that Doctor Coleman's experience with what happened on the planet had to be the deciding factor here. I'm sure that you can appreciate that.
I appreciate the fact that you had a decision to make. I also find myself in that position now, Jim, and I'm asking you to report for an examination.
What? What do you base that on?
Development of emotional instability and erratic mental attitudes since returning from that planet.
You'll never make that charge stick. Any fool can see why you're doing this.
I'll let Starfleet Command be the judge of my motives.
I won't submit to this petty search for revenge!
But you will submit to Starfleet regulations, and they state that the ship surgeon will require full examination of any crew member that he has doubts about, including the captain.
Captain Kirk here.
Sulu here, Captain. Starfleet Command is requesting additional details on the delay.
I'll be right there.
Pulse, pressure, blood count, all body functions normal. Then why am I here?
Doctor McCoy? Doctor McCoy
Quiet would be best for you.
Where's Doctor McCoy?
I'm in charge now.
Bring Doctor McCoy at once! He is in command of medicine on this ship.
He was taken off your case by Captain Kirk.
By Captain Kirk?
It was done for your own protection, Doctor Lester.
I am not Janice Lester! She did this to me! Now how can I make you understand? Janice has driven herself mad with jealousy, hatred and ambition.
Nurse Chapel. Bring Mister Spock and Doctor McCoy to me at once. Now they must believe I am not Janice Lester. I am imprisoned in her body, but I am not Janice Lester.
She is suffering from the delusion of being Captain Kirk.
I am not Janice Lester!
The paranoia has been developing for the past six months. The radiation seems to have intensified it. She must be kept sedated.
Shall prepare a mild sedative, Doctor?
Of course.
You are insane, Doctor Lester.
I must've sounded quite mad to you before.
What you've been through would've completely broken most of us.
Well, I'll be all right now. Could I see your Doctor McCoy?
I'm afraid that's against Doctor Coleman's orders.
Oh. Is a visit by that very kind Mister Spock to be allowed?
Perhaps that can be arranged before we reach the Benecia Colony.
The Benecia Colony? But isn't the Enterprise going to rendezvous with the Potemkin at Beta Aurigae?
Well, first we have to let you recuperate at Benecia. (offering a drink) You'll feel better if you have a little.
Well, I'll try. Thank you. Oh, it is good. Thank you. Could I finish it slowly, Nurse Chapel?
Well
I promise I'll be good.
Well, I'll be right back. I'm glad you're feeling so much better.
These tests should help me pinpoint the cause of Jim's illness.
Good. Knowledge of the captain's aberrant behaviour is spreading through the ship. The crew is becoming increasingly tense.
Yes, well what worries me most is that Jim seems completely unaware that something is wrong with him. We've got to make him realise that something serious is happening before treatment can even begin.
I'm afraid that is a forlorn hope, Doctor. The illness appears to be primarily mental.
One of us should be able to get to him. I keep looking for an approach, but the speed at which the illness has traveled makes it doubly difficult.
Perhaps the Surgeon General's office should be alerted.
You know headquarters, Spock. They're only interested in results of specific tests. So far all we have to offer are our opinions.
Are you sure that the captain will comply with your order in his present state of mind?
I'll use my medical authority to enforce it if necessary.
Doctor, we are treading on very thin ground. Actions such as these might be misinterpreted.
Well, then, so be it. Our responsibility is clear.
Whatever happened to the captain on that planet must've taken place in the short space of time that he was alone with Doctor Lester. Perhaps a conversation with her might shed some light.
Well, it's worth a try. Why don't you try to get to Doctor Lester while I examine Jim.
Well, gentlemen. I'm here, Doctor.
Spock. Bones. Help me. Don't let them lock me away from you. I've got to talk to you.
Jim!
She might have killed someone.
Put her in isolation in her room. Maintain a twenty four hour watch. No one, absolutely no one, is to talk to her without my permission!
Yes, sir.
Captain.
How is the doctor?
She regained consciousness very quickly.
Good. I have questions to ask her.
Did the captain order it, sir?
Why should he? They are my questions, therefore I am ordering it, Lieutenant.
The captain said no one is allowed to speak to Doctor Lester.
Has such an order ever included his senior officers?
No, sir. Mister Spock, I think the captain meant that a guard should be present.
By all means, Lieutenant.
That's enough. That's enough. Your heart will last forever, Captain.
How am I otherwise?
In the pink, as usual. Liver, kidney, blood count, metabolic rate. Everything, even your glands, functioning at their usual, normal peak of efficiency.
Good. I hope you're as pleased about it as I am.
Don't get dressed yet.
You said I was in perfect condition.
Physically.
I don't think another test is necessary.
The Robbiani dermal-optic is crucial. It reveals the basic emotional structure. You had one once before. Now I need another one to compare with that previous test. There should be no change in your dermal-optic reactions to the colour wavelengths. Over here, Captain. Over here, Captain.
Complete life-entity transfer with the aid of a mechanical device?
Yes, that's what it must've been.
To my knowledge, such total transfer has never been accomplished with complete success anywhere in the galaxy.
It was accomplished and forgotten long ago on Camus Two. I am a living example.
That is your claim. As yet, it is unsubstantiated by any external evidence or objective tests.
Nevertheless, Spock, it is the truth I'm speaking.
Now lower your arms and open your eyes.
At this moment Doctor McCoy is examining the captain for psychological changes. If any facts are uncovered, that would be acceptable evidence. The only kind which is acceptable to Starfleet Command and to the crew of the Enterprise.
Spock, when I was caught in the interspace of the Tholian Sector, you risked your life and the Enterprise to get me back. Help me get back now. When the Vians of Minara demanded that we let Bones die, we didn't permit it.
That is true. The captain did not. However, those events have been recorded. They could have become known to you.
You are closer to the captain than anyone in the universe. You know his thoughts. What does your telepathic mind tell you now?
I believe you. However, my belief is not acceptable evidence. Evidence must be factual. Doctor McCoy may be of help. Come with me.
I'm sorry, sir, but Doctor Lester cannot leave here.
Well, are you satisfied with the results of the tests?
There is no positive evidence of any disorder.
You're asking me to violate the captain's orders.
He is not the captain.
You're as mad as she is. You're to leave here at once. I follow orders.
Certainly, Lieutenant. We all must do our duty.
Security guard!
No hard feelings, Bones. You did your usual thorough, good job.
I'm sure everything's going to be all right.
Captain Kirk here.
Captain Kirk to Security. On the double to Doctor Lester's room!
It's quite all right, Ensign. Everything is under control.
Phasers.
A repetition of your physical violence is not called for, sir. No physical resistance will be offered.
Attention, all personnel. First Officer Spock has been placed under arrest. He has conspired with Doctor Lester to take over the ship from your captain. A hearing will be immediately convened to consider the charges and specifications of a general court martial on the charge of mutiny.
Surely you must have more than that to go on.
I have stated my evidence. Telepathic communication with the mind of Captain James T. Kirk.
Your evidence is completely subjective. We have to have evidence that we can examine out in the open.
You've had great deal of evidence, except that of the chief witness. The one who should be the real subject of this investigation is kept locked away and in isolation. Why, Captain?
She's dangerously insane. We've seen the evidence.
She is dangerous only to your authority, sir.
Mister Spock. Mister Spock, my authority has been given to me by Starfleet Command, and only that high authority can take it away.
The witness, sir. Bring on the witness. Let your officers put the questions.
Mister Lemli, have Doctor Janice Lester brought here.
Doctor McCoy, while Mister Spock was busy with his ambitious plot, what were you doing?
Examining you.
Oh, yes. You were deeply concerned about my health, emotional and physical, since leaving Camus Two. Is that correct?
Yes, that's correct.
Instead of trying to destroy me, you were searching for ways to help me. Doctor McCoy, for the record, will you tell the court your findings?
The captain is in the best of physical condition. His emotional and mental state is comparable to the time that he assumed command of the Enterprise.
Thank you, Doctor McCoy. Mister Spock, were you aware of Doctor McCoy's findings?
I know them now.
And what have you to say now?
I am disappointed and deeply concerned that there is no objective evidence to support my position. So far.
Doctor Coleman, if you're required here, we'll call you.
We certainly appreciate your being here. Everyone is deeply aware that you have been subjected to inordinate emotional stress. We had hoped to avoid any further stress, but Mister Spock disagrees. It is his opinion that your testimony is important in determining the merits of his case. And since we are solely interested in arriving at a just decision, I'm going to have to ask you a few more questions. I'll try not to upset you. You claim that, that you are Captain James T. Kirk?
No. I am not Captain Kirk. That is very apparent. I claim that whatever it is that makes James Kirk a living being special to himself is being held here in this body.
Oh. Well. However, as I understand it, I am Doctor Janice Lester.
That's very clever, but I didn't say it. I said, the body of James Kirk is being used by Doctor Janice Lester.
A subtlety that somehow escapes me. I assume that this switch was arrived at by mutual agreement.
No. It was brought about by a violent attack by Doctor Lester and the use of equipment she discovered on Camus Two.
Violence by the lady, perpetrated on Captain Kirk? I ask the assembled personnel to look at Doctor Janice Lester and visualise that historic moment. Can you, can you tell me why Doctor Janice Lester would agree to this ludicrous exchange?
Yes. To get the power she craved, to attain a position she doesn't merit by temperament or training. And most of all, she wanted to murder James Kirk, a man who once loved her. But her intense hatred of her own womanhood made life with her impossible.
Are you prepared with witnesses? One will do.
Sir, there is only one issue here. Is the story of life-entity transfer believable? This crew has been to many places in the galaxy. They've been witness to many strange events. They are trained to know that what seems to be impossible often is possible, given the scientific analysis of the phenomenon.
Mister Spock, have you ever heard of a case such as described by Doctor Janice Lester?
Not precisely, no.
Oh. Assuming that you are correct in your belief, do you expect Starfleet Command to place this er, this er, person in command of the Enterprise?
I expect only to reveal the truth.
And with the truth revealed, that I am not really the captain, and knowing that she would not be allowed to serve as the captain, then you would be the captain! It is inevitable! Spock. Spock, give it up! Return to the Enterprise family. All charges will be dropped and the madness that temporarily overcame all of us on Camus Two will fade and be forgotten.
And what will become of Doctor Lester?
Doctor Lester will be cared for always. It is a debt and a responsibility I owe her from the past.
No, sir. I shall not withdraw a single charge that I have made. You are not Captain Kirk. You have ruthlessly appropriated his body, but the life entity within you is not that of Captain Kirk. You do not belong in charge of the Enterprise and I shall do everything in my power against you.
Lieutenant Lysa, play back those last two sentences from Mister Spock's tirade.
You do not belong in charge of the Enterprise and I shall do everything in my power against you.
You heard the statements placed into the record by you. Do you understand the nature of it?
I do. And I stand by it.
(thumping the table) It is mutiny! Deliberate, vindictive, insane at its base! But mutiny is charged, and encouragement to mutiny. Doctor McCoy, Mister Scott, you heard it! On the basis of these statements, I call for an immediate vote, by the powers granted to me as captain of the Enterprise. A recess is declared, to be followed by a vote.
Yes, sir. An immediate vote before our chief witness can be left to die on some obscure planet with the truth locked away inside of her.
Silence. You will be silent! A recess has been declared. There will be no cross-discussion. When I return, we will vote on the charge of mutiny. The evidence presented here is the only basis of your decision.
Scotty.
Doctor. Doctor, I've seen the captain feverish, sick, drunk, delirious, terrified, overjoyed, boiling mad. But up to now I have never seen him red-faced with hysteria. I know how I'm going to vote.
I've been through this with Spock. He's not being scientific and neither are you.
It may not be scientific, but if Mister Spock thinks it happened, then it must be logical.
Don't you think I know that? My tests show there's nothing wrong with the captain. Now that's the only fact Starfleet's going to be interested in.
Headquarters has its problems, and we have ours. And right now, the captain of the Enterprise is our problem. They're going to call for the vote in a few minutes. Let me put one last question. Suppose you vote with me, in favour of Spock. That means two votes to one and Spock is free. What do you think the captain'll do?
I don't know.
Aye, you know, all right. It'll stick in his craw. He'll never accept it.
We don't know that.
I tell you, he won't. Then, Doctor, that's the time we move against him. We'll have to take over the ship.
We're talking about mutiny, Scotty.
Aye. Are you ready for the vote?
Yes. I'm ready for the vote.
Play the tapes of the conversation in the corridor.
Aye, sir.
Then's the time we move against him. We'll have to take over the ship.
We're talking about mutiny, Scotty.
Aye. Are you ready for the vote?
That's enough. We know what was said.
Enough to convict you of conspiracy with mutineers. And you're so charged. The sentence, death. Mister Lemli.
Starfleet expressly forbids the death penalty.
All my senior officers turning against me?
The death penalty is forbidden. There's only one exception.
General Order Four. It has not been violated by any officer on the Enterprise.
I am responsible. The execution will be immediate. Go to your posts. Go to your posts.
Mister Lemli, take them to the brig. Prepare for execution. Go on!
The captain really must be going mad if he thinks he can get away with an execution.
Captain Kirk wouldn't order an execution even if he were going mad. That cannot be the captain.
What difference does it make who he is? Are we going to allow an execution to take place?
If security backs him up, how will we fight him?
I'll fight them every way and any way I can.
Lieutenant Lysa, inform all sectors of my decision. Have each section send a representative to the place of execution on the hangar deck. Mister Chekov, how far to the Benecia Colony?
Coming within scanning range.
Plot co-ordinates for orbit. Mister Sulu, lock into co-ordinates as soon as orbit is accomplished. Interment will take place on Benecia.
You have received your orders! You will obey my orders. You'll be charged with mutiny! You will obey my orders or, or,
For a moment, I thought that I was up on the bridge.
Perhaps you were.
Then it's possible the transference can be broken.
Well, if it happens again, I'll fight to stay there.
The bridge is where you belong.
To accomplish that, each one of us must be ready to seize any opportunity to break out of here and attack.
Arthur, the transference is weakening.
What happened?
For a moment, I found myself back with the prisoners. I will not go back to being Janice Lester. You must help me prevent it.
The only way to prevent the transference is by the death of Janice Lester. You must carry out the execution.
I can't. I can't. The crew is in mutiny. You must kill her for me.
I have done everything else for you. But I will not murder for you.
Then do it for yourself. If Kirk doesn't die, we'll both be exposed as murderers. Does that give you any choice?
The dosage should be doubly lethal.
It is.
To prevent further conspiracy, you will be removed to separate cells. If there's any resistance, you'll be given a sedative until you learn co-operation. Doctor Lester will be first. Follow Doctor Coleman.
May I point out, Captain
Kill him! Kill him!
Ohh! I've lost to the captain. I've lost to James Kirk! I want you dead! I want you dead! I want you dead! Oh, I'm never going to be the captain. Never. Kill him.
You are, you are as I loved you.
Kill him.
Can you do anything for her?
I'd like to take care of her.
Of course. Come with me.
I didn't want to destroy her.
I'm sure we all understand that, Captain.
Her life could have been as rich as any woman's, if only. If only.